---
type: paper
source: isal_a_00465.pdf
format: pdf
processed: true
---

# Can Being Aware of the Illusion of Self Augment an Agent’s Affordances:

Can Being Aware of the Illusion of Self Augment an Agent’s Affordances:
Integrating Buddhist Philosophy, Cognitive Science, and Artificial Life
Thomas Doctor1,2, Elizaveta Solomonova1,3, Bill Duane1,2,4, and Olaf Witkowski1,5,6,7
1Center for the Study of Apparent Selves, Kathmandu, Nepal
2Centre for Buddhist Studies at Rangjung Yeshe Institute, Kathmandu University, Kathmandu, Nepal
3Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
4Bill Duane and Associates
5Cross Labs, Cross Compass Ltd., Japan
6Earth-Life Science Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
7College of Arts and Sciences, University of Tokyo, Japan
info@csas.ai
Objectives
Developments in cognitive science, AI, and artificial life
force us to consider minds and intelligences that are
different from human minds. The dominant contemporary
metaphor
for
any
kind
of
mind
is
based
on
an
understanding of the human brain and human experience,
both of which frequently presuppose a notion of self. In
some disciplines, including Buddhism, contemporary
philosophy of mind, and cognitive science, much debate
has focused on the nature of the self, and one insight from
all these domains is that while we are strongly attached to
notions of stable selves, it is also possible to conceive of
selves as dynamic, interconnected, and illusory. We
suggest that an interdisciplinary approach, drawing on
fields with well-developed models of self in relation to
agency, can offer new insights. We suggest that the view
of self as illusory, and awareness of this illusion, in both
human
and
non-human
minds,
may
augment
and
qualitatively change the agent's affordances, or range of
possible actions.
The illusion of self in Buddhism,
philosophy and contemplative science
Our approach is based on Buddhist views of “no self”
(Garfield, 2014; Kapstein, 2016), which in turn can be
seen as developing the idea that what is conventionally
considered to be a single and enduring person (or agent)
is constructed upon a plurality of impermanent causal
factors. Buddhist philosophers may thus suggest that
because no person or agent can be found apart from these
constantly changing factors, it is more profitable to
consider a person an imputation rather than a substantial
and enduring individual (Kapstein, 2016). According to
Buddhist traditions, and as a basis for contemplative
practices, this view has ethical implications: it is thought
that an individual who recognizes oneself as an entity that
is constantly co-constituted by their interactions with
others,
will
develop
prosocial
qualities.
Mahāyāna
Buddhist thought describes this process as an orientation
towards
others
as
part
of
one’s
own
identity
(Maitreya-Asaṅga et al., 2014). In other words, the self
can in this way be considered both extendable
and
illusory. In Buddhist thought, the notion of “self as an
illusion” can then be summarized as a rejection of
singular and enduring individuals (Gold, 2021; Kapstein,
2016), which in turn may enable perceptions of selfhood
as
distributed/distributable
and
dynamic
(Maitreya-Asaṅga et al., 2014).
Cognitive science: contemplative practice
and lucid dreaming alter affordances
Indeed, this notion of diminishing the importance and
stability of a sense of self, while counterintuitive but
intriguing,
has
gained
traction
in
contemporary
contemplative
practices
as
well
in
cognitive
neuroscience (Antonova & Nehaniv, 2018; Britton et al.,
2013; Wallace, 2009). Many meditation practices that
involve disciplined and deliberate activities of focused
observation of one’s own thoughts and sensations are
aimed at testing, experientially, the idea that what may
otherwise typically be referred to as an “I” cannot be
found as any specific entity. Research shows that many
practices aimed at decreasing the process of “selfing” (a
process of reifying one’s own identity as an independent
self), result in beneficial effects, such as increased
well-being (Britton et al, 2013), and in increases in
social connectedness (Hutcherson, Seppala, & Gross,
2008) as well as prosocial emotions and behaviours
(Condon, 2019; Luberto et al., 2018).
In
addition
to
mindfulness
practices,
the
lived
experience of the illusion of self can sometimes be
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/isal/proceedings-pdf/isal2021/33/4/1930431/isal_a_00465.pdf by guest on 20 October 2025

triggered by an experience of lucidity during dreams.
Lucid dreams are dreams in which the dreamer is aware
of
the
fact
that
they
are
dreaming
(LaBerge
&
Rheingold, 1991). Following this realization, they may
gain control over some of the elements of the dream, in
particular over the way their body may move (e.g.
flying) and over aspects of the environment (Stumbrys,
Erlacher,
Johnson,
&
Schredl,
2014).
In
Tibetan
Buddhist tradition, cultivation of dream lucidity is an
integral part of a contemplative path (Holecek, 2016;
Wallace & Hodel, 2012), and it is suggested that through
the gradual realization of the illusory nature of one’s
interactions with the dreamworld (which is a very
compelling simulation of the real world), one may, in
turn, realize the illusory nature of one’s self.
Both contemplative practices and lucid dreaming, have
been
linked
to
general
increase
in
the
sense of
well-being
and
insight
(Dahl
&
Davidson,
2019,
Konkoly & Burke, 2019), and are characterized by
potential
change
in
affordances.
The
concept
of
affordances (Gibson, 1977) refers to the “relationships
between the abilities of organisms and features of the
environment”
(Chemero,
2003).
Recent
work
has
identified
multiple facets of affordances, including
social affordances (Valenti & Gold, 1991). For example,
experience in contemplative practice may lead to change
in the way in which one interacts with others and the
world, thus changing social affordances; and lucid
dreams open up possibilities for action which are not
normally possible in waking life (Tholey, 1989) thus
altering environmental (dream) affordances. While these
practices
are
both
private
experiences
of
self as
relatively illusory, their documented effects lead to
potential questions of how and whether these insights
can be applied to other kinds of minds, in particular to
AI.
Integrating with tools from AI and
artificial life
While AI is interested in replicating human intelligence,
the field of artificial life more largely studies toy models
of living and cognitive systems in order to understand
them (Bedau et al., 2000; Bedau, 2003). The main
distinction with the disciplines mentioned above, is that
artificial life will approach the illusion of self not
directly, but by replicating its effect within a model.
Through
rigorous
modeling assumptions, one may
simulate the mechanisms to test hypotheses without
interacting with the original object of study. As long as
each step can be stated clearly, such a model has the
power to disentangle difficult questions in the original
domain of interrogation.
This paper attempts to address, in the light of AI and
artificial life models, the question of the self and, more
specifically, the nature of the effects that may follow
from an agent understanding self as an illusion. In order
to break down the question of whether awareness of the
illusion of self augments an agent’s affordances into its
composing factors, we naturally need an actionable
understanding of the notions of self, individuality,
identity, agency, affordances, enaction, empowerment,
control, integration, as well as awareness, and illusion.
A wide amount of literature exists on each of these
concepts, and we don’t intend here to perform an
extensive
review
of them, but rather identify the
existence of a minimal set of concepts that will allow us
to address the question at hand. One may start by
framing a self in a model, which connects to the notion
of an individual (Barandiaran, 2003; Krakauer, 2020),
while also requiring tools to capture the identity of an
autonomous agent interacting with its environment via
sensorimotor
loops
(Varela,
1997;
Beer,
2014).
Information theory offers a language to characterize
such
entities
and
synergies
between
them,
using
measures such as predictive information (Bialek, 2001;
Ay, 2008), synergistic information (Edlund et al., 2011),
multi-information (McGill, 1954; Schneidman, 2003),
and integration (Tononi et al., 1994; Lungarella et al.,
2005).
Of
course,
the meaning of information is
modulated
by
its
use
(Wittgenstein,
2010;
Donaldson-Matasci et al., 2010; Kolchinsky & Wolpert,
2018), and such characterization may therefore benefit
from being related to a function such as empowerment,
or the quantification of options available and visible to
an agent (Klyubin et al., 2008), or characterization of
the change in affordances (Borghi et al., 2011). To
capture the remaining mechanisms relating to the sense
of self and of agency (Haggard, 2017), such tools should
then be carefully connected to a formal, relevant
mathematical model.
Hypothesizing that an artificial model can provide an
integrated framework to address the question at hand,
the information and modeling tools we proposed above
may profit from being connected to frameworks from
cognitive science and philosophy addressing the sense
of agency as a private experience. The challenge, then,
is to extract meaningful data from the study of human
cognition, and integrate them. This effort will require a
dual process of using what we know about the sense of
self, and testing whether and how this knowledge may
affect experience and behavior in human and other kinds
of minds. We propose that the notion of the self as
illusion, as realized in AI and artificial life practices,
may contribute to novel fields of affordances for
non-human intelligence. This framework may contribute
not only to testing theories of affordances, but also shed
light on new fundamental principles in AI science,
possibly leading to new kinds of technologies.
Acknowledgment
This project is made possible through the support of a
grant from Templeton World Charity Foundation, Inc.
The opinions expressed in this publication are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
Templeton World Charity Foundation, Inc.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/isal/proceedings-pdf/isal2021/33/4/1930431/isal_a_00465.pdf by guest on 20 October 2025

References
Antonova, E., & Nehaniv, C. L. (2018). Towards the
Mind of a Humanoid: Does a Cognitive Robot Need a
Self?
-
Lessons from Neuroscience.
In: Takashi
Ikegami; Nathaniel Virgo; Olaf Witkowski; Mizuki Oka;
Reiji Suzuki; Hiroyuki Iizuki (ed.) Proceedings of the
Artificial Life Conference 2018 (ALIFE 2018 - Tokyo,
Japan). MIT Press, 2018.
Ay, N., Bertschinger, N., Der, R., Güttler, F., & Olbrich,
E.
(2008).
Predictive
information
and
explorative
behavior of autonomous robots. The European Physical
Journal B, 63(3), 329-339.
Barandiaran, X. E., Di Paolo, E., & Rohde, M. (2009).
Defining agency: Individuality, normativity, asymmetry,
and spatio-temporality in action. Adaptive Behavior,
17(5), 367-386.
Bedau, M. A. (2003). Artificial life: organization,
adaptation and complexity from the bottom up. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 7(11), 505-512.
Bedau, M. A., McCaskill, J. S., Packard, N. H.,
Rasmussen, S., Adami, C., Green, D. G., Ikegami, T.,
Kaneko, K., & Ray, T. S. (2000). Open problems in
artificial life. Artificial Life, 6(4), 363-376.
Beer, R. D. (2014). The cognitive domain of a glider in
the game of life. Artificial Life, 20(2), 183-206.
Borghi, A. M., Di Ferdinando, A., & Parisi, D. (2011).
Objects,
spatial
compatibility,
and
affordances:
A
connectionist study. Cognitive Systems Research, 12(1),
33-44.
Britton, W. B., Brown, A. C., Kaplan, C. T., Goldman,
R. E., DeLuca, M., Rojiani, R., ... Frank, T. (2013).
Contemplative
Science:
An
Insider
Prospectus.
In
Svinicki, M (ed). New Directions for Teaching and
Learning: Contemplative Studies in Higher Education.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Condon, P. (2019). Meditation in context: factors that
facilitate
prosocial
behavior.
Current
Opinion
in
Psychology,
28,
15-19.
doi:10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.09.011
Chemero,
A.
(2003).
An
outline
of
a theory of
affordances. Ecological Psychology, 15(2), 181-195.
Dahl, C. J., & Davidson, R. J. (2019). Mindfulness and
the contemplative life: pathways to connection, insight,
and purpose. Current Opinion in Psychology, 28, 60-64.
Donaldson‐Matasci,
M.
C.,
Bergstrom,
C.
T.,
&
Lachmann, M. (2010). The fitness value of information.
Oikos, 119(2), 219-230.
Edlund, J., N. Chaumont, A. Hintze, C. Koch, G.
Tononi, et al. (2011). Integrated information increases
with
fitness
in
the
evolution
of
animats.
PLOS
Computational Biology, 7: e1002236.
Garfield, Jay. (2014) Engaging Buddhism: Why It
Matters to Philosophy. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Gershenson, C. (2018). Information in science and
Buddhist
philosophy:
Towards
a
non-materialistic
worldview.
Preprint:
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=326
Gibson, J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In
Gibson J. J (ed.) The Ecological Approach to Visual
Perception. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gold,
J.
C.
(2021).
Vasubandhu.
The
Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2021 Edition),
Zalta,
E.
N.
(ed.),
forthcoming
URL:
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2021/entries/vasub
andhu/
Haggard, P. (2017). Sense of agency in the human brain.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 18(4), 196.
Holecek, A. (2016). Dream Yoga: Illuminating Your Life
Through Lucid Dreaming and Tibetan Yogas of Sleep.
Louisville: Sounds True.
Hutcherson, C. A., Seppala, E. M., & Gross, J. J. (2008).
Loving-kindness
meditation
increases
social
connectedness.
Emotion,
8(5),
720-724.
doi:10.1037/a0013237
Kapstein, M. (2016). Self, Non-Self, and Personal
Identity.
In
Oxford
Bibliographies.
doi:DOI:
10.1093/OBO/9780195393521-0147
Klyubin, A. S., Polani, D., & Nehaniv, C. L. (2008).
Keep your options open: An information-based driving
principle for sensorimotor systems. PloS ONE, 3(12),
e4018.
Kolchinsky, A., & Wolpert, D. H. (2018). Semantic
information, autonomous agency and non-equilibrium
statistical physics. Interface Focus, 8(6), 20180041.
Konkoly, K., & Burke, C. T. (2019). Can learning to
lucid
dream promote personal growth?. Dreaming,
29(2), 113.
Krakauer, D., Bertschinger, N., Olbrich, E., Flack, J. C.,
&
Ay,
N.
(2020).
The
information
theory
of
individuality. Theory in Biosciences, 139(2), 209-223.
LaBerge, S., & Rheingold, H. (1991). Exploring the
World of Lucid Dreaming. New York: Ballantine Books.
Luberto, C. M., Shinday, N., Song, R., Philpotts, L. L.,
Park, E. R., Fricchione, G. L., & Yeh, G. Y. (2018). A
systematic review and meta-analysis of the effects of
meditation
on empathy, compassion, and prosocial
behaviors. Mindfulness, 9(3), 708-724.
Lungarella, M., Pegors, T., Bulwinkle, D., & Sporns, O.
(2005).
Methods
for
quantifying the informational
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/isal/proceedings-pdf/isal2021/33/4/1930431/isal_a_00465.pdf by guest on 20 October 2025

structure of sensory and motor data. Neuroinform, 3:
243-262.
Lutz, A., Slagter, H. A., Dunne, J. D., & Davidson, R. J.
(2008).
Attention
regulation
and
monitoring
in
meditation.
Trends
in
Cognitive
Sciences,
12(4),
163-169.
Maitreya-Asaṅga,
Shenga,
&
Mipham.
(2014).
Ornament of the Great Vehicle Sūtras: Maitreya's
Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra with Commentaries by Khenpo
Shenga and Ju Mipham. Boston: Shambhala.
McGill,
W.J.
1954.
Multivariate
information
transmission. Psychometrika 19: 97-116.
Moreno, A., & Etxeberria, A. (2005). Agency in natural
and artificial systems. Artificial Life, 11(1-2), 161-175.
Oizumi, M., Albantakis, L., & Tononi, G. (2014). From
the
phenomenology
to
the
mechanisms
of
consciousness: integrated information theory 3.0. PLoS
Computational Biology, 10(5), e1003588.
Pacherie, E. (2007). The sense of control and the sense
of agency. Psyche, 13(1), 1-30.
Schneidman, E., S. Still, M.J. Berry & W. Bialek. 2003.
Network information and connected correlations. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 91: 238701.
Stumbrys, T., Erlacher, D., Johnson, M., & Schredl, M.
(2014). The phenomenology of lucid dreaming: an
online survey. American Journal of Psychology, 127(2),
191-204.
Retrieved
from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24934010
Tholey, P. (1989). Consciousness and abilities of dream
characters observed during lucid dreaming. Perceptual
and Motor Skills, 68(2), 567-578.
Tononi, G., O. Sporns & G.M. Edelman. 1994. A
measure
for
brain
complexity:
Relating functional
segregation and integration in the nervous system. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91: 5033-5037.
Varela, F. J. (1997). Patterns of life: Intertwining identity
and cognition. Brain and Cognition, 34(1), 72-87.
Valenti, S. S., & Gold, J. M. (1991). Social affordances
and interaction I: Introduction. Ecological Psychology,
3(2), 77-98.
Wallace, A. (2009). Contemplative Science: Where
Buddhism and Neuroscience Converge. New York:
Columbia U. Press.
Wallace, B. A., & Hodel, B. (2012). Dreaming Yourself
Awake Lucid Dreaming and Tibetan Dream Yoga for
Insight
and
Transformation.
Boston:
Shambhala
Publications.
Wittgenstein, L. (2010). Philosophical Investigations.
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/isal/proceedings-pdf/isal2021/33/4/1930431/isal_a_00465.pdf by guest on 20 October 2025
