---
type: paper
source: s00018-023-04790-z.pdf
format: pdf
processed: true
---

# Vol.:(0123456789)

Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences (2023) 80:142 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-023-04790-z
REVIEW
Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences
Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale 
competency in developmental biology
Michael Levin1,2 
Received: 5 March 2023 / Revised: 24 April 2023 / Accepted: 27 April 2023 / Published online: 8 May 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
A critical aspect of evolution is the layer of developmental physiology that operates between the genotype and the anatomical phenotype. While much work has addressed the evolution of developmental mechanisms and the evolvability of specific 
genetic architectures with emergent complexity, one aspect has not been sufficiently explored: the implications of morphogenetic problem-solving competencies for the evolutionary process itself. The cells that evolution works with are not passive 
components: rather, they have numerous capabilities for behavior because they derive from ancestral unicellular organisms 
with rich repertoires. In multicellular organisms, these capabilities must be tamed, and can be exploited, by the evolutionary process. Specifically, biological structures have a multiscale competency architecture where cells, tissues, and organs 
exhibit regulative plasticity—the ability to adjust to perturbations such as external injury or internal modifications and still 
accomplish specific adaptive tasks across metabolic, transcriptional, physiological, and anatomical problem spaces. Here, I 
review examples illustrating how physiological circuits guiding cellular collective behavior impart computational properties 
to the agential material that serves as substrate for the evolutionary process. I then explore the ways in which the collective 
intelligence of cells during morphogenesis affect evolution, providing a new perspective on the evolutionary search process. 
This key feature of the physiological software of life helps explain the remarkable speed and robustness of biological evolution, and sheds new light on the relationship between genomes and functional anatomical phenotypes.
Keywords  Embryogenesis · Regeneration · Competency · Intelligence · Problem-solving · Morphogenesis · Evolutionary
Introduction
The basic workhorse of evolutionary theory is the cycle 
between the genotype (the target of mutations) and the phenotype (that which selection acts upon). While many models 
and analyses focus on these key elements, another is often 
neglected: the physiological processes that underlie morphogenesis. This is the control layer that sits between the genomically specified cellular hardware (proteins) and the form and 
function that selection sees: anatomy and behavior (Fig. 1). In 
effect, the behavior of cellular collectives in morphogenesis 
is the software of the system—the functional outcomes of the 
molecular machines encoded by genomic information [1]. This 
is relevant not only for embryogenesis, which converts compressed genomic information into a rich emergent set of largescale structures, but also for regeneration, metamorphosis, 
remodeling, and other processes which establish and modify 
growth and form. Much work has addressed the evolution of 
developmental mechanisms, the evolvability of specific architectures, and the emergent complexity of epigenesis [2–6]. 
Moreover, recent work has begun to emphasize the active, 
cybernetic, problem-solving capacities of this process beyond 
feedforward emergence [7–11] and explore ways in which evolution increases the functional intelligence of cellular collectives [12–14]. Here, I focus on the complementary side of the 
evolution–intelligence feedback loop. This is fundamentally 
distinct from earlier efforts in the adaptationist/selectionist 
paradigms, and emphasizes problem-solving, unconventional 
embodied agency, and creativity that are specifically not due 
to adaptation. I first overview the data that illustrate the functional competencies of morphogenesis, casting multicellular 
growth and form as the behavior of a collective intelligence. I 
 *	 Michael Levin 
	
michael.levin@tufts.edu
Allen Discovery Center at Tufts University, 200 Boston Ave. 
334 Research East, Medford, MA 02155, USA
Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering 
at Harvard University, 3 Blackfan St., Boston, MA 02115, 
USA

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 2 of 33
Fig. 1   Multiscale architecture of evolution and morphogenesis. A 
Biological systems exhibit complexity at every scale of organization, 
from molecular networks to whole colonies of organisms. Crucially, 
these are not just structural levels, but functional: each level’s components are problem-solving agents which navigate physiological, 
transcriptional, anatomical, behavioral, and other spaces. B Many 
organisms go through a bottleneck that forces a compression of form 
and function into a generative encoding which does not specify the 
final structure, but rather specifies a process which creates that form. 
This is used in machine learning as the “autoencoder” architecture 
(top sub-panel), which compresses data into a compact representation and then decompresses it to result in an output that is similar at 
large scale, but not identical in the lowest-level details. The process of 
reproduction via an egg stage (bottom sub-panel) has the same architecture, except that evolution not only learns the encoding, but also 
simultaneously encodes the structure of the developmental machinery—the decoder itself. C The evolutionary process has not only a 
genome (the target of mutation) and the anatomical phenotype (the 
target of selection), but also a critically important layer between 
them: the morphogenetic physiology that guides embryogenesis, maturation, metamorphosis, remodeling, regeneration, and suppression 
of cancer and aging. The circuits that implement the computational 
features of this layer themselves have a bottleneck (or “bow-tie”) 
architecture, exploiting biochemical, bioelectrical, and biomechanical modalities. These use higher-level “virtual governor” [275, 295] 
nodes such as calcium patterns, resting potential, or tension—powerful dynamical control points that are complex functions of the underlying molecular details and do not map 1:1 with any gene or gene 
product. Images in all panels by Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative; 
Panel A used with permission from [14]

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 3 of 33 
then focus on a fascinating knowledge gap: what implications 
do the computational properties of the biological software 
layer have for the evolutionary process itself?
From genotype to phenotype 
in development: implications of an indirect 
pathway
One key property of developmental morphogenesis is its 
emergent nature, in which the relationship between genotype and phenotype is highly indirect. It has long been 
clear that genomes do not directly code for anatomies; 
instead, DNA encodes for proteins—the nano-level hardware made available to each cell. The behavior of cells, 
in a “social” context of multicellularity [15, 16], is what 
gives rise to functional anatomies (Fig. 2). Cellular behaviors include proliferation, migration, differentiation, shape 
change, and apoptosis, operating in parallel over millions 
or billions of cells that are signaling to each other via 
chemical, electrical, and mechanical modalities—coordinating directly, at long range [17], or by using their microenvironment as a stigmergic scratchpad. This generative 
process is critical not only during embryonic development, 
but also in maturation, metamorphosis, regeneration, and 
suppression of cancer and aging—establishing and maintaining order across multiple scales [18, 19].
A major implication of this architecture is that it is 
irreversible—while it is straightforward to watch (or 
potentially to simulate) how biology follows local rules 
of chemistry and physics and thus to discover what anatomy emerges from a given genome, the inverse problem 
[20] is in general unsolvable: determining which protein sequences must be encoded to produce an arbitrary, 
desired large-scale anatomical form. This irreversibility 
of the recursive, highly emergent process of morphogenesis is what limits full-scale Lamarckism: the difficulty 
is not how to penetrate Weismann’s barrier and edit the 
genome in light of somatic experience—mechanisms 
exist for this [21–23]. Rather, it is how to know what to 
change in a genome to produce a desired feature based 
on physiological events (e.g., a longer neck). This is a 
direct consequence of the fact that while the central dogma 
could, mechanistically, be reversed, the output of the 
DNA- > RNA- > protein cycle is not anatomy, so reversing it does not solve the problem of going from anatomical features back to DNA. This is why we cannot predict 
the anatomies and morphogenetic capabilities of chimeras 
made of different cell types [24], despite having genomic 
information for both. For example, while we have the 
genomes for frog and axolotl species, one of which makes 
embryonic legs, we cannot predict if a frogolotl (chimeric 
50/50 mix) would have legs, and if so, whether those legs 
will consist only of axolotl cells or both, or whether they 
will be regenerative like adult axolotl legs. This is because 
this is fundamentally a question of collective decisionmaking, which is still poorly understood. In fact, we cannot even predict a single-species anatomy from a genome 
without first comparing it to a genome whose anatomical 
outcome we already know. This also sets a ceiling on the 
biomedical applications of technologies such as CRISPR 
and other forms of gene therapy: without being able to 
determine what we have to change to get a specific systemlevel outcome, our ability to control genomic information 
to solve complex injuries and disease states will be highly 
limited. Workers in the field of AI and machine learning 
are well familiar with this issue as “credit assignment”. 
However, as will be argued below, this limitation is actually a hugely important intelligence ratchet in biology, 
because it forces evolution to increase and exploit the 
competency of its material and the subsequent top-down 
control (biological innovation via behavior shaping).
The indirect nature and complexity of morphogenesis 
raises questions as to how evolutionary exploration can give 
rise to coherent organisms: the search space seems extremely 
rugged and hard to navigate using the hill-climbing algorithms we associate with evolution. This has given rise to a 
number of proposals [1, 25–36] to expand the neodarwinian 
synthesis in various ways. Here, I take a different direction, 
focusing on one specific aspect of morphogenesis which may 
provide a critical missing piece in our understanding of evolution: the affordances supplied by the plasticity and problem-solving capabilities of the cells which form the substrate 
of morphogenesis. Metazoan cells have numerous adaptive 
behaviors because they derive from ancestral unicellular 
organisms that needed a full range of behavioral capabilities to survive. Thus, the evolution of metazoan anatomy 
operates not on a passive material, but on an agential one 
[37]. I argue that what evolution is really searching is not the 
enormous space of all possible local rules, but instead the 
space of behavior-shaping signals by which cells hack each 
other’s functionality, and that the collective intelligence [38, 
39] of cellular swarms has major implications for the rate 
and course of evolution.
Insights from collective intelligence 
and behavioral science: morphogenesis 
as the work of computationally competent 
modules
New developments in the science of collective intelligence, 
and classic concepts from behavior science, are beginning to 
provide a crucial new lens on morphogenesis that complements the current view of patterning as a complex dynamical system (such as a cellular automaton) with open-loop 

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 4 of 33
emergent complexity. This stance emphasizes plasticity and 
computational competencies for problem-solving in diverse 
spaces—aspects which need to be dealt with using ideas 
from cybernetics [8, 9, 40], as well as physics. William 
James defined intelligence as the ability to reach the same 
goal by different means [41]. The emphasis is not just the 
well-known importance of modularity [2], but also the critical cybernetic properties of biological modules and the ways 
these enable reliability and task delegation (i.e., problem 
decomposition) across scales in vivo. Together, these features connect readily to concepts such as re-programmability, hacking, predictability, and multiscale polycomputation 
[42, 43]. This has massive implications for evolution, which 
are described below.
It is critical to emphasize from the outset that this 
research program does not support non-naturalistic explanations for evolution, does not make use of exotic influences 
on mutation such as quantum effects [44, 45], and does not 

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 5 of 33 
require any goal-directedness in the evolutionary process at 
the large scale. Instead, it builds on progress in connectionist machine learning [34, 35, 46–50], basal cognition [12, 
51–55], and an extension of neuroscience to developmental 
bioelectricity [56–58] to reveal how the collective intelligence of cells serves as an affordance for evolution. In that, 
it is complementary to current efforts to understand how 
network and other generic mathematical and physical properties affect the evolutionary process [59–68]. It should be 
noted that the below discussion is specifically focused on the 
traditional view of evolution, avoiding the fascinating and 
critical roles of epigenotype, epimutations, and other mechanisms that enrich the dynamics of inheritance. My goal here 
is to examine the major impacts that cellular intelligence has 
on even a mainstream view of the Modern Synthesis. Thus, 
I avoid the interesting (and widely debated) aspects of epigenetic inheritance [28, 69–73], which will be incorporated 
in future work, to focus attention on a number of unconventional hypotheses in the context of an uncontroversial view 
of evolution.
Developmental plasticity and evolution 
today
The implications of developmental architectures for evolution have begun to be explored via the understanding of 
phenotypic plasticity [74–78] and the way that behavioral 
agency of whole organisms shapes how evolution explores 
the latent space of phenotypes [77–82]. For example, the 
changes in skeletal features, behaviors, and physiology of 
fish and amphibia in novel stressful environments [83, 84] 
have been suggested to bias evolution and strongly complement traditional mutational variation as a source of change 
[77, 78, 85]. However, the crucial aspect is not simply that 
the complexity of development enables changes by real-time 
events, and that the genome does not uniquely specify one 
possible outcome. More than that, a view of morphogenesis 
as simply a recursive, massively parallel process limits bottom-up control via genetic editing in biomedical engineering 
for the same reason it limits the efficiency of evolutionary 
search across micro-level properties of a passive material. 
It is proposed that for the same reasons that bioengineers 
are now turning to top-down control policies and interventions [37, 58], evolution has discovered an architecture that 
exploits its unique substrate: cells and tissues with specific 
competencies, behaviors, and input-driven decision-making 
computations.
It is proposed that the plasticity of development and its 
implications for evolution cannot be optimally captured by 
an exclusive dynamical systems perspective in which different outcomes simply occur as the result of different environmental inputs working their way through a mechanical 
process. It has been suggested that morphogenetic mechanisms exist on a continuum of problem-solving capacities 
that exists across scales within the biosphere [54, 77, 81]. 
Evolution can thus be seen as not only shaped by organism-level learning and intelligent behavior [27], but also by 
Fig. 2   Emergence and genetic encoding architectures. A The incredibly complex anatomical structure of an organism (shown here is a 
cross section through a human torso) is produced by the blastomere 
descendants of a single fertilized egg cell and its genome, which 
directly specifies protein sequences (some of the cellular hardware 
components), not large-scale geometrical features or functionality 
(nor aspects such as cytoskeletal structure or membrane composition, both of which are inherited parallel to the DNA [206]). B One 
way to achieve complexity via a compressed encoding is through 
“emergence”. Here are shown four simple rules of Conway’s “Game 
of Life” that specify the states of a specific cell at each time point 
based on the state of its neighborhood [296]. Such cellular automata 
produce patterns that, to a large-scale observer, reveal movement patterns (B’) such as ‘gliders’, and even structures (B”) that continuously 
produce these virtual moving dynamical patterns (entities), despite 
the fact that the rules are extremely simple and do not say anything 
about global patterns or their properties. C In the problem space of a 
complex coordinate plane (2-dimensional grid of positional information), a very simple, local policy can be defined for determining the 
state of every cell at a position in the grid: a color can be assigned 
based on how well a root-finding method, such as Halley’s method 
performs (a simple algorithm [297]). This gives rise to very complex 
biological-looking forms (C’) complete with multiscale structure and 
subtle left–right asymmetry. However, all of these kinds of emergent 
complex systems have a fundamental problem: they are irreversible. 
What changes could be made in the rules of (B) or the short complex 
number formula that encodes the image in (C’), to make a glider that 
moves at a different angle or a pattern that had a different number of 
blobs and spacing of “hairs” on them, respectively? Such open-loop 
(purely feed-forward) schemes do not facilitate control interventions 
(e.g., regenerative medicine) and limit evolution to a simple search 
of the micro-space of generative rules which is very rugged because 
the final features are an extremely complex, tangled result of the elements’ following of those rules. D A different architecture is suggested by considering that the subunits may be themselves complex 
components that implement feedback—cybernetic goal-directedness 
in which energy is used to optimize specific higher-level metrics. The 
level of control of the subunits that build the organism, as well as of 
the organism itself (and any swarm of which it may be a part), can 
span many different competency levels on a scale such as proposed by 
[99]. E Simple picture of genes being responsible for specific features 
of the organism (which, had it been true, would have made the goals 
of genomic editing straightforward) has been supplanted with one in 
which each genetically encoded piece of hardware ends up contributing to many different components of the whole [248] (E’), which 
raises the inverse problem described above. In contrast, thinking of 
the genetics as specifying the hardware of computational agents that 
have competency to solve specific problems (e.g., build an appropriate structure despite changes in cell number, or starting position) 
offers a much more direct architecture. Closed-loop (homeostatic) 
agents enable behavior-shaping signals that alter setpoints, not just 
micromanage hardware components, allowing for a much more linear, 
tractable, and robust control policy that facilitates evolution as well as 
biomedical control. Images in panels A, B, E by Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative. Panel D used with permission from [99]
◂

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 6 of 33
physiological and anatomical level intelligence [55]. This 
perspective links the plasticity of the morphogenetic process 
with the field of basal cognition, which seeks early evolutionary origins of classical intelligence and problem-solving 
in behavioral science by looking at lower level examples of 
adaptive behaviors that rely on information processing. Cells 
and their components have many competencies for adaptive behavior when navigating physiological, metabolic, and 
transcriptional spaces [86]. Examples include the ability of 
gene-regulatory networks and chemical pathways to learn 
from experience [87–89], for transcriptional machinery to 
rapidly adjust to compensate for entirely novel physiological stressors [90], and for unicellular slime molds to explore 
their environment at a distance and make decisions using 
memory and comparison of alternatives [91–95].
Intelligence and evolution: the impact 
of competency at new scales
The impact of intelligence on evolution has been studied 
[36, 96]. However, it has largely focused on intelligence of 
the organism (classical behavior in 3D space), and is only 
now beginning to be extended to higher levels such as the 
intelligence of swarms [97, 98] and entire ecosystems [49]. 
The framework discussed herein extends the study of the 
relationship of intelligence and evolution in several basic 
ways. It extends the notion of intelligence to sub-organismal scales, casting morphogenesis as the result of collective 
intelligence at the molecular cell, tissue, and organ levels. 
It operates within a gradualist [14] perspective on intelligence and goal-directedness [57, 99], which are both used 
here in a naturalistic, cybernetic, engineering sense of varied degrees of competent problem-solving in diverse spaces 
by unconventional agents (i.e., not restricted to higher-level 
cognitive capacities in brainy animals). Thus, it emphasizes 
morphogenesis as a computational process, not merely the 
emergent outcome of highly parallel local rules that could be 
dealt with by established complexity theory tools. Moreover, 
it expands the concept of intelligent behavior across a key 
invariant: effective navigation of diverse problem spaces, 
which includes problem-solving in physiological, metabolic, transcriptional, and anatomical spaces [12, 13, 86]. 
With these expansions in hand, it becomes possible to see 
how evolution pivoted some of the same strategies across 
these domains, and to then explore the implications that this 
multiscale competency architecture has for the evolutionary 
process itself.
Several open problems are addressed below. What are 
some of the features of morphogenesis that enable evolution 
to search a very difficult space (with pleiotropy, degeneracy, 
redundancy, etc.)? How can evolution be so rapid and effective at using mutation to address opportunities of form and 
function? How do we explain the ubiquitous presence of 
novel capabilities in living things for which no direct selection forces are plausible? Analysis of morphogenesis as the 
behavior of a collective intelligence of cells leads to the following key proposals. First is that the space which evolution 
actually searches is not only the space of microstates of the 
genome, but also a much more tractable space of behaviorshaping signals: evolution exploits cellular intelligence as 
a highly exploitable affordance. Second is that by using a 
variational autoencoder-like architecture of compression into 
a generative genome (Fig. 1), evolution is freed from overtraining on past conditions and pushed to evolve generalpurpose problem-solving machines which inevitably display 
robustness, plasticity, and adaptive success in entirely novel 
circumstances. Interestingly, these ideas are more familiar concepts in neuroscience; consistently with the recent 
advances in basal cognition [100–104], these concepts apply 
long before complex brains appear. My hope is that the following analyses extend an active research program on these 
ideas in regenerative medicine [58, 105–109] and synthetic 
bioengineering [37, 101, 110–113] to also impact evolutionary biology and engineering of artificial systems via evolutionary algorithms [96, 114–119].
Scaling up from cellular competency 
to collective intelligence
Basal cellular competencies did not disappear during the 
transition to multicellularity: instead, they scaled up as a 
collective intelligence to operate in larger and more complex 
problem spaces [13]. Models of mechanisms by which single-cell competencies potentiate problem-solving capacities 
in larger and different problem spaces include gap junctional 
merging of intracellular milieus and other forms of tissuelevel signaling (e.g., stress propagation). This promotes 
sharing of chemical engrams, which also help to wipe the 
individuality of cells, and enlarges the memory, predictive 
capacity, and sensory/effector radius of cellular networks, 
enabling them to pursue larger goal states in spaces like 
anatomical morphospace [14].
The key feature of scaling up individuality (whether 
evolved or engineered) is for higher levels of control to get 
their components to do things they do not do when operating as individual units [46, 120]. This can be discovered 
by extracting the parts of organisms and examining their 
behaviors in new contexts [121]. A cell-level example is 
that fragments of keratocytes move in a specific direction in 
an electric field, but whole keratocytes (collections of such 
fragments) actually move in the opposite direction [122]. A 
morphogenetic and behavioral example is seen in Xenobots 
[123, 124]. Frog embryo skin cells, in vivo, form a twodimensional, passive layer on the outside of the animal that 

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 7 of 33 
protects it from pathogens. However, when liberated from 
the instructive influences of the other cells, frog epithelial 
cells instead form a Xenobot—a functional, self-motile 
construct with many novel behaviors that are normally suppressed and hidden by the instructive signaling of other cells 
during development [125]. Human tracheal cells from adult 
donors also form such biobots, with the remarkable ability 
to traverse and heal neural wounds [126]. Thus, it is not 
obvious what the default morphogenetic behaviors and capabilities of cells are, because of the ubiquitous dominating 
controls of other cells in their environment. In some cases, 
embryonic capacities (e.g., formation of appendages) are 
“lost” at maturity (e.g., limbs in adults of many species), 
but can be activated in non-regenerative contexts by specific 
stimuli that can be provided by bioengineers in the context 
of regenerative medicine [127–129].
These and other examples indicate that biological components are themselves, to varied degrees, autonomous, but are 
controllable by signaling from other cells [37]. The dynamic 
of using simple signals that take advantage of the recipients’ 
complex, reliable repertoire generalizes to the concept of 
hacking, which is applicable at multiple scales and in many 
contexts (Fig. 3), ranging from chemical signals in cellular 
induction to colony-scale behavioral phenomena driven by 
acoustic signals [130]. The crucial focus in this concept is on 
the role of an agent that takes advantage of affordances in its 
own way, not necessarily in the ways “intended” by an engineer, or by evolutionarily-prior functions. Past discussions of 
relevant phenomena include developmental niche construction [131, 132], cancer cells reprogramming normal neighbors [133], host-altered behavior due to parasites that exploit 
neurotransmitter mechanisms [134] (and the reverse—the 
host evolving machinery to manipulate the parasite [135]), 
zombie ants controlled by fungi [136], the explore/exploit 
strategies of young mammals [137], and many others. An 
amazing example of morphogenetic hacking is the formation of galls, where signals from a parasite force the leaf 
cells away from their normal flat, green tissue phenotype and 
into building spiky, three-dimensional colorful forms [138].
Many such phenomena work because of the agency of the 
material being hacked. This includes viral infections since 
viruses have very limited capabilities and rely on the cell for 
all of its physiology; the use of toxins to manipulate hosts 
[139]; and the phenomenon of kinematic self-replication 
by Xenobots. These motile synthetic organisms make copies of themselves in an evolutionarily novel manner: when 
provided with loose cells, the biobots corral them into piles 
which self-compact and thus spontaneously form the next 
generation of biobots which go on to repeat the cycle [125]; 
this only works because the material itself is competent to 
form a viable Xenobot when rearranged (Fig. 3). At higher 
levels of organization, one can see classic organism-level 
communication and signaling as examples of hacking the 
more agential elements of one’s environment (i.e., the conspecifics, predators, and prey contained in it).
Thus, the concept of hacking extends well beyond the 
typical strategies used for traditional engineering with inert 
materials, or computational matter (as in, the computer science notion of hacking [140]), to systems with significant 
agency: hacking is conceptually linked to behavior shaping. 
In this perspective, everything in biology is a hacker, reaping 
rewards of efficient manipulation of its environment (and 
its internal components) using the appropriate tools (from 
direct chemical effects to subtle signals meant to be interpreted by complex agents): cells, parasites, viruses, transformed cells defecting from the morphogenetic goals of a 
tissue (cancer), tissues and organs during morphogenetic 
induction and competition (even within the same body [141, 
142]), whole organisms, and swarms. Evolution can thus 
search the space of behavior-changing signals, exploiting the 
complex, agential nature of the cells which are its substrate 
as a hugely powerful set of affordances [143].
Bioelectric control: a mechanism for scaling 
cell behaviors to large‑scale morphogenetic 
goals
One especially powerful interface. which is exploited by 
evolution to accomplish morphogenesis, is the bioelectric 
layer of control (Fig. 4). Cells perform numerous computations in controlling their behavior via the voltage dynamics 
of ion channels and pumps [107]. But evolution discovered 
very early on, around the time of bacterial biofilms [144], 
that electric networks are also extremely convenient ways to 
integrate and process information across space and time, and 
to scale the functions of individual computing units towards 
a large-scale task (the same reason that brains, and computers, use this modality [145]). Several examples from the field 
of developmental bioelectricity illustrate this point.
For example, in frog embryos, a set of cells known as 
“instructor cells” [146, 147] normally suppress melanocytes’ 
native behavior via serotonergic signals. In the absence of 
these signals, the melanocytes exhibit an over-proliferative, 
hyper-invasive phenotype strongly resembling melanoma 
[148]. Even more interestingly, the bioelectric signaling 
scales independent decision-making of the cells toward a 
collective outcome. When the control system is perturbed, 
stochastic outcomes (e.g., 70% conversion) result, but only 
at the level of the organism—each animal’s melanocytes 
are either all normal or all converted, at some stochastic 
rate: they toss a coin, but all the cells are tossing the same 
coin. It required a machine learning algorithm to analyze 
this control system and discover an intervention that breaks 
the concordance and enables individual melanocytes within 
the same body to make independent decisions [149]. This 

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 8 of 33
bioelectric signaling, which involves serotonergic control, 
parallels what nervous systems do to bind individual cell 
behaviors, even stochastic ones, toward a system-level collective behavior.
The vertebrate face [150, 151] is patterned by a set of 
bioelectric gradients that regionalize gene expression to 
determine the locations of eyes, mouth, and other components. Reproducing these patterns elsewhere in the body via 

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 9 of 33 
misexpression of specific ion channels enables the induction 
of whole ectopic organs, such as eyes [152] on the gut or 
tail of a tadpole (thus unlocking novel capabilities of body 
regions, since only the anterior neurectoderm is competent 
to make eyes via signals from the chemical master regulator 
Pax6). Remarkably, when only a small number of cells are 
injected, they recruit their normal, unperturbed neighbors 
to participate in the process to make a normal-sized lens 
(Fig. 3). Thus, in response to the bioengineer’s instructions 
to “make an eye”, the prompted group of cells not only 
activates all of the required downstream molecular events 
(which are not directly specified by the simple, trigger-like 
stimulus supplied), but also determine how many additional 
cells are needed for large-scale morphogenetic setpoints 
such as size control and signal to activate them as well. This 
ability to scale recruitment of elements to task size is similar to that seen in collective intelligences such as colonies 
[153, 154].
Crucially, this is not just modularity [3] (“do the same 
thing again, in another place”), but takes advantage of 
cellular swarms’ competency to adjust dynamically to 
circumstances as needed, because the modules are not 
structural or hardwired. The cybernetic lens is appropriate 
here (and fruitful) because cell groups demonstrate diverse 
degrees of ability to accomplish a defined set of outcomes 
despite changing circumstances and can be manipulated topdown. This system for integrating the behavior of cells and 
tissues offers many advantages for phenotypic richness, but 
like any programmable interface is amenable to exploitation. 
For example, the bioelectric system for control of head shape 
and location in planaria [155, 156] can readily be hijacked 
by microbes that can control the number and structure of 
their host’s heads [157]. It is straightforward for evolution 
to also exploit these modular competencies: to reproduce an 
eye in another location, evolution does not need to reproduce 
all the underlying mechanisms.
Morphogenetic control as a collective 
intelligence
“Intelligence: the ability to reach the same ends by 
different means.”
― William James
The current paradigm for understanding morphogenesis 
focuses largely on ideas from emergence and complexity 
theory. It is clear that some local rules, executed repeatedly 
and in parallel by large numbers of cells, can result in an 
emergently complex structure (Fig. 2). This is true, and we 
now have good mathematical formalisms for understanding 
emergent complexity. However, this is a limiting paradigm 
because it is entirely feed-forward, or open loop: causality 
is thought to move in only one direction (from the molecular 
details upward) [158, 159], and thus all modifications have 
to be made at the level of the rules. Because the inverse 
problem is not generally solvable, this view locks in a model 
of evolution limited to searching the genotype space (which 
may be extremely rugged, due to its nonlinear relationship 
to the phenotype space). It also limits workers in bioengineering and regenerative medicine to exclusively targeting 
the molecular hardware in hopes of improving system-level 
outcomes (which in turn results in the difficulties with drug 
discovery [160]).
Fortunately, there are now tools available to begin to 
think in different ways about morphogenetic control, which 
facilitate new research and make possible a new roadmap 
for discovery of intervention policies, both by bioengineers 
and by the evolutionary process. The first is cybernetics [99, 
161]: by emphasizing the information-processing capacities 
of multiscale components of living systems (with all of the 
attendant implications of circular control, multiscale causality, etc.), it becomes possible to recognize the reliability of 
morphogenesis as a consequence of the goal-directedness 
Fig. 3   Morphogenetic hacking. A Morphogenesis is implemented 
by cells, which were once organisms themselves. Thus, the process 
of anatomical homeorhesis [252, 298] is implemented by a set of 
behavior-shaping signals in which some cells control the behavior 
of other cells. Image by Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative. B One 
example is seen in the behavior of frog skin cells, which produce a 
passive, two-dimensional outer layer in a normal frog embryo, but 
when freed from the instructive interactions of other cells become 
Xenobots—spherical constructs that move autonomously and even 
exhibit entirely new behaviors such as kinematic self-replication (B’), 
in which they assemble loose cells into clumps that become the next 
generation of Xenobots and repeat the cycle in subsequent generations [124, 125]. Panels B, B' by Douglas Blackiston, used with permission from [125]. C When bioelectric signals that indicate “build 
an eye here” are reproduced in other locations of a frog embryo via 
potassium channel modulation [152], a complete eye can be formed 
even out of gut cells without needing to micromanage the construction of a complex organ—the modular trigger induces a morphogenetic process that can reliably take place in novel environments. Panel 
C used with permission from [148]. D The process is more than just 
triggers of master-regulator signals. When an insufficient number of 
cells is modulated (indicated in blue beta-galactosidase tracer), they 
recruit their normal (unmodified) neighbors to complete the task of 
building an ectopic lens of the right shape and size. This ability to 
complete a particular action in morphogenetic space by controlling 
the behaviors of other cells in a context-sensitive, dynamical manner is a key feature of controllability and reliability—it is how the 
problem-solving capacities of cells, not just ability to execute the 
same hardwired local rules, facilitate adaptive robustness in novel 
circumstances.  Panel D courtesy of Sherry Aw, used with permission from [37]. E The controllability can be exploited even in crosskingdom interactions (not just by bioengineers), in which plant cells 
are induced to form morphologically highly novel structures known 
as galls by signals from fungi or insect embryos: the novel structures, 
which differ greatly from the default, are an example of natural hacking of morphogenetic machinery (E = urchin gall on a scrub oak, by 
Timothy Boomer at WildMacro.com; E’ = hedgehog gall, by Andrew 
Deans)
◂

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 10 of 33
of underlying processes. It is essential to abandon the traditional scientific teleophobia [162] because cybernetics and 
control theory now provide a mature, naturalistic, quantitative science and engineering approach to mechanisms with 
goals. Goals do not require magic, they require a specific 
causal structure [163, 164], which is ubiquitous and not 
restricted to complex brains. The critical importance of the 
cybernetic worldview for developmental biology has been 
recognized already [7–9, 165–167]. Additional tools are provided by advances in information theory which have now 
rigorously shown that higher levels of organization can have 
causal power and drive lower-level events in the only sense 
that matters: by serving as the most effective control points 
at which to make changes in the system [168–172]. This is 
as relevant for regenerative medicine as it is for evolution, 
and is becoming a very useful lens through which to relate 
to biological systems.
The crucial transition is recognizing that homeostatic 
cycles, the atoms of cybernetic systems, are not merely 
feedback loops (which are widely accepted as ubiquitous 

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 11 of 33 
in biology), but are the first rung on a spectrum of intelligence [99]. Intelligence is used here in William James’ definition, not limited to advanced metacognition in primates. 
The field of basal cognition [53, 54, 173] seeks to unravel 
the evolutionary origins of the brain’s remarkable trick—
unifying the activity of millions of cells (neurons) toward 
a common purpose in behavioral space. By examining the 
transitional forms that smoothly continue all the way down 
to microbial molecular networks, a wider understanding of 
diverse intelligence has had to be forged [14, 55]. From this, 
the view of the brain as a collective intelligence has been 
enlarged to understand the morphogenetic transformations 
of the body as a collective intelligence of cellular swarms, 
which solve problems in other spaces [39, 86]. Thus, the 
robustness of development is not of first order (do the same 
thing reliably each time), but of higher degree (achieve the 
same target morphology, by various means, despite various 
perturbations).
Taking evolutionary continuity seriously and applying 
concepts from cybernetics reveals an important invariant: 
navigation in problem spaces as a common set of capacities 
that range across a continuum (Fig. 5) of competency. Different degrees of intelligence are thus cached out in engineering terms as abilities to overcome barriers in the problem 
space, in a wide range of diverse inorganic, organic, and 
neural-level systems. This generic formulation enables recognition, prediction, and manipulation of systems across a 
continuum that covers all the intermediate levels of sophistication that lie between two magnets’ ability to get together 
and Romeo and Juliet’s ability to get together [14, 86]. But, 
these competencies cannot be definitively ascertained from 
observations of the default course of morphogenesis, which 
obscures the ability of living tissue to handle novelty (of 
both, external environment and internal composition) and 
lulls the observer into a limited expectation that genomes 
code only for specific outcomes and no more. A very rich set 
of examples belie this misconception and instead support a 
view of morphogenesis as a goal-directed, homeodynamic 
process [11, 174].
The most obvious examples are seen in regulative development and regeneration [57, 175], where cells work to 
implement and maintain a large-scale form (target morphology) despite surgical, genetic, and physiological sources of 
defects. But it goes much further than that. Tadpoles, in 
which the native eyes are prevented from forming and an 
ectopic eye is instead placed on the tail, can see and perform 
well in visual behavioral training [176], even though the 
ectopic eye connects to the spinal cord (or just to peripheral 
tissue) rather than to the brain—this radical change to the 
sensory–motor architecture does not require generations of 
adaptation to produce successful behavior. Tails grafted to 
the flanks of amphibians slowly turn into limbs [177]—a 
structure more appropriate to the large-scale target morphology (even though, for example, the local environment 
for the tail-tip cells is perfectly correct); and craniofacial 
structures that start out in odd positions are often corrected 
[178]. Frog skin cells, forbidden access to the normal reproductive and other capacities of an entire embryo, nevertheless create a functional proto-organism that makes copies of 
itself through kinematic replication, a mode unknown within 
the natural tree of life [125]. Perhaps the most remarkable 
example of this is Slijper’s goat [179], in which the effort of 
trying to walk upright (due to lack of forelimbs) drove, in 
one generation, many of the anatomical and physiological 
Fig. 4   Bioelectric machinery underlying morphogenetic control. 
A The computational architecture of the nervous system relies on a 
network of cells, which set their resting potential via ion channels in 
their membrane, and communicates that state via controllable electrical synapses known as gap junctions [299]. B This machinery is 
ancient, with all body cells having resting potential across their membrane ­(Vmem) mediated by the same ion channels and most cells making gap junctional connections to form bioelectrical networks [188]. 
C This interface can be manipulated in any tissue in the same way as 
neuroscientists probe brain tissues: using molecular reagents to control connectivity (via opening and closing gap junctions) or directly 
setting voltage states by opening and closing ion channels (using 
drugs or optogenetic light stimulation). Also, the downstream messengers (neurotransmitters) operating in many tissues can be controlled directly [300, 301]. D An example of imaging of the bioelectrical prepatterns that define morphogenetic setpoints is the “electric 
face” revealed by signals from a voltage-sensitive fluorescent dye 
that indicates the future positions of the gene expressions, and subsequent anatomical structures, of the early frog embryo anterior ectoderm. This pattern is instructive because if it is shifted artificially 
and induces the predictable changes in subsequent development. 
Note the simplicity of the encoding—the bioelectrical states represent high-level order (elements of the target morphology for regulative development), such as the location of an “eye” or “mouth”, not 
the state of gene expression or individual stem cell fate. E The bioelectric representation of the target morphology guiding the cellular 
collective can work as a counterfactual memory, as in the example 
of the cryptic planaria: animals with normal one-headed anatomy and 
gene expression, but a two-headed target morphology representation 
in the bioelectric circuit (shown here using the voltage dye imaging), 
which causes them to build two-headed animals if cut into fragments 
[193]. F The bioelectric prepattern is a true memory because, despite 
the wild-type genetic sequence, fragments from two-headed animals 
continue to generate two-headed animals in perpetuity (with no more 
treatments) [195]—this is an example of the software layer that is 
reprogrammable and enabled by the genetically specified ion channel 
hardware, which does not need to change to be shifted to an entirely 
different large-scale target morphology. G Not only can head number 
be reprogrammed by a brief physiological stimulus to the morphogenetic agent, but also head shape: an animal with a triangular head 
shape can be shifted toward morphologies (including brain shape 
and stem cell distribution) [197, 198] of other species with round or 
flat heads. This enables the cellular collective to explore attractors in 
morphospace (G’), using the exact same genome, which eventually 
could become canalized into genetically distinct species. Panels in A, 
B, C are courtesy of Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative; A, B used 
with permission from [188]. Panel D is used with permission from 
[150]. Panel E is used with permission from [106]. Panels F, G are 
used with permission from [107]. Panel G’, by Alexis Pietak, is used 
with permission from [197]
◂

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 12 of 33
changes usually thought to require long periods of evolutionary adaptation to bipedalism.
These kinds of abilities to achieve target morphology are 
not unique to damage-repairing programs that evolved specifically to handle injury. They occur at all scales of organization, suggesting they may be a general capacity arising 
from our microbial ancestors’ need to respond to changes 
in their environments and in their own genomes. For example, mice with mutated semaphorin proteins still produce 
(through a novel path) correct connectivity of migrating 
thalamocortical connections [180]. Even more radically, 
animals artificially made with extra copies of their entire 
genomes, which produces huge cells, still exhibit normal 
size [181–183]. In the kidney system of polyploid newts, the 
normal cell:cell communication that creates a tubule from 
eight to ten cells working together is swapped for a single 
enormous cell that wraps around itself to create the same 
final outcome [184]. This is a good example of downward 
causation, because in the service of a large-scale anatomical 
goal, different molecular mechanisms (cell–cell communication vs. cytoskeletal bending) are deployed as needed for an 
unexpected change (a drastic increase in the copy number 
of all genes). The ability to handle, without periods of evolutionary change, an unexpected alteration in something as 
basic as one’s own genome and cell size echoes the theme 
that has been seen in the study of behavioral learning and 
evolution [36, 185]: degrees of behavioral intelligence can 
produce adaptive outcomes on timescales that are much 
faster than evolutionary search for hardwired phenotypes 
for each problem, and on landscapes whose ruggedness is 
too high for the basic evolutionary search process.
Seeing development, metamorphosis, regeneration, and 
cancer suppression all as manifestations of an anatomical 
homeostasis loop (Fig. 6) raises the obvious question of how 
and where the setpoint (target of homeostatic error minimization) is stored. Having been predicted as far back as the 
1940s [186, 187], it has recently been found and manipulated using the same concepts and tools that have allowed 
neuroscientists to manipulate goal-regulating behaviors in 
living brains.
Bioelectric networks as reprogrammable 
interface to morphogenetic capabilities
Evolution broadly exploits bioelectric networks for the same 
reason they underlie cognition in the brain and computation 
in our information technology: they have some very attractive properties with which to build generic learning and 
problem-solving systems [58]. All cells participate in electric networks, which allows them to compute and increase 
the size and complexity of simple homeostats (Fig. 7). Neurons speed-optimized the process and took advantage of 
Fig. 5   Examples of morphogenetic and functional competency. A Many 
embryos, including human, can be split in half at early stages and give rise to 
multiple normal whole bodies (monozygotic twins), making up for very drastic 
damage to nevertheless achieve the correct target morphology. B The same is 
true of regeneration, in which for example a salamander limb can be amputated at any level, and the cells will rapidly rebuild exactly what was missing, 
stopping when the correct target morphology has been achieved. C A remarkable example of top-down control occurs when newt cells are made to be larger 
than normal, by forcing polyploidy [181, 184]. The same overall kidney tubule 
structure and diameter results, despite the incorrect details at the lower level 
(excess genetic material, and wrong size of building components), as the cells 
adjust their number to the new size—this happens in real time (developmental 
timescale) not requiring evolutionary changes in the genome. Most amazingly, 
a different underlying molecular pathway is triggered (cytoskeletal bending, vs. 
cell–cell communication) when the cells are made so large that the only way to 
build the structure is for one single cell to wrap around itself, leaving a topological lumen. D The plasticity is not only structural, but also functional. When 
eye primordium cells are transplanted to the tail, they not only make a correct eye despite abnormal environment, but the resulting animals (which can be 
made to lack primary eyes) can efficiently see out of these eyes, which do not 
connect directly to the brain [176]. This does not require evolutionary adaptation to the new sensory system architecture, illustrating the amazing ability of 
body components to make up for unexpected changes induced by mutation or 
other means: a property that has huge implications for the evolutionary process. Panel A photo by Oudeschool via Wikimedia Commons. Panels B, C by 
Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative. Panel D by Douglas Blackiston

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 13 of 33 
direct long-range connections, but other than that, many of 
the tricks that brains use to handle novelty are in fact prevalent across the body, long predating classical neuroelectricity 
on both evolutionary and ontogenic timescales [145]. Many 
aspects of connectionist models of neural networks’ computational capabilities apply to developmental events [34, 
46, 58, 120]; for example, regeneration is a kind of pattern 
completion in anatomical space, and stochastic phenotypes 
arising from the same genome can be studied as a kind of 
perceptual bistability [106].
Bioelectric networks mitigate the inverse problem by 
serving as the “hidden layers” of a control network linking 
genetics to anatomy (Fig. 1). The relationships of ion channel genes to the bioelectric pattern, and bioelectric pattern 
to its resulting anatomy, are each easier to invert than the 
direct genotype–anatomy link, so they help to decompose 
the control problem into two easier problems. This not only 
helps natural evolution, but also helps engineers design 
and evolve complex proto-cognitive circuits, and increases 
control capacities for workers in regenerative medicine. 
Bioelectric networks provide modularity (triggers of complex subroutines, such a simple voltage state that triggers 
the “build an eye” or “build a leg” subroutine [188])—a 
known component of evolvability [3, 189]. They also provide an important kind of coarse graining, since voltage is 
a high-order parameter over ion channel gene and protein 
microstates, and individual ion concentrations: electrogenic 
proteins can be swapped out as needed (e.g., V-ATPase complex in the tadpole tail can be phenocopied by a yeast proton 
pump with no sequence or structural homology, because it 
produces the correct physiological signal), and everything 
still works as long as the bioelectric state is correct [190]. 
Like in the central nervous system, bioelectric interfaces 
that control tissue- and organ-level structure [107] are very 
attractive control nodes. It is no surprise that viruses, whose 
genomes are under significant pressure to remain minimal 
and concise, devote some of that precious space to ion channel genes [191, 192].
Bioelectric circuits also provide another crucial competency: memory, which is a specific instance of their more 
general capacity for software-level reprogrammability. 
As in the brain, bioelectric circuits can store information 
in a way that is readily changeable in the lifetime of the 
animal and enable the exact same (genomically specified) 
hardware to have different modes of activity depending on 
prior experience. For example, in planaria, the bioelectric 
circuit that controls the number of heads can be targeted 
with a brief (2-day) physiological intervention that re-sets 
the state of the circuit to specify “two heads” instead of the 
default one-headed bioelectric pattern memory. In this case, 
the exact same hardware (genetically wild-type planarian 
cells) can harbor multiple representations of the bioelectrically encoded target morphology that guides the cellular 
collectives during regeneration [193–195]. The question of 
what determines the number and shape of heads in the planarian is subtle, paralleling the question of what determines 
behavior. It is genetics in the sense that genomes specify the 
ion channels needed to form the circuit, but it is not genetics 
in the sense that the actual outcome is controlled by experience (in physiological and behavioral space, respectively). 
Evolution could make use of this in precisely the same way 
as it exploits classical learning (brain bioelectric dynamics), 
via genetic assimilation and Baldwin effects [29, 196] that 
can later canalize adaptive outcomes of morphogenetic and 
physiological plasticity. Indeed, it has been shown that existing planarian species’ head shapes are readily recapitulated 
by a genetically wild-type animal experiencing changes to 
its bioelectric circuit during regeneration—100–150 million years of evolutionary distance in morphospace can be 
crossed in a few days because of the dynamics of bioelectric pattern memories [197, 198]. If proven advantageous, 
this could eventually be transferred into the genome by ion 
channel mutations that produce the same bioelectric circuitdriven developmental behavior (assimilation of physiological plasticity into the hardware [199]).
Multiple modalities for computation 
and control across scales
As ideal as bioelectric networks are for the plasticity and 
control dynamics that potentiate evolutionary change, they 
do not have a monopoly on this role (Fig. 1). Other mechanisms, operating at other scales, provide the same benefits 
[60]. For example, the richness of cytoskeletal information 
processing [200–202] enables cortical inheritance in unicellular organisms: there, as in planaria, DNA is not the 
only source of morphogenetic information. Changes made 
to unicellular form can persist across generations [203–205]; 
for example, surgical rotation of a small patch of the cell 
surface creates a stable line of animals in which a portion of 
the ciliary beat pushes food out of their mouths—a condition which their perfectly wild-type genome cannot correct. 
The cytoskeleton serves as a plastic information and control 
medium stretching (parallel to DNA) all the way back to 
our last common universal ancestor [206]. The availability 
of a rapid, stable but re-writable, internal scratchpad is an 
important component of any system that is to exhibit ability to deal with novelty and to navigate problem spaces in a 
flexible, dynamic fashion.
Another subcellular component with interesting proto-intelligent competencies is the class of pathways, which includes 
both protein interaction and gene-regulatory networks. These 
have been shown to underlie anticipation and probabilistic 
inference [207–209], six different kinds of memory [87–89, 

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 14 of 33

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 15 of 33 
210, 211], and other capacities that evolution can exploit in 
the control of individual cell behavior and thus organ-level 
morphogenesis. An example of transcriptional problemsolving is seen when planaria are cultured in barium [90], a 
non-specific potassium channel blocker. At first, their heads 
degenerate (due to the many cells that require ­K+ flux), but 
they rapidly re-grow new heads that are completely barium 
insensitive. Transcriptional analysis reveals that these tissues 
up- and down-regulate just a handful of genes to get back to 
physiological and anatomical setpoints despite the inability 
to regulate potassium. The remarkable thing is that barium 
blockade is evolutionarily novel—planaria very likely have 
never encountered the exotic stressor of barium during their 
evolutionary history, and there have been no selection pressures to develop specific responses to it. Their ability to 
navigate physiological and transcriptional spaces to solve an 
entirely new problem is an example of subcellular competencies for novel scenarios (and perhaps, include the ability of 
generalization from scenarios that they did encounter, such as 
epilepsy-induced excitotoxicity). Finally, the use of chromatin as a computational resource has been suggested to be an 
important driver in evolutionary transitions [212, 213].
Increased understanding of the capabilities of cells and 
their components dovetails with efforts in modern robotics in 
which morphological computation (via biomechanics [214, 
215] and bioelectrics [216]) is heavily exploited—the emphasis is not on developing a specific controller that does all the 
hard computational work for a fixed body, but in evolutionary 
approaches that exploit bodies’ innate competencies [217]. By 
being easy to control, the body does much of the hard work 
of the evolved controller [96, 218, 219]. This is an important dynamic for understanding how multiscale intelligence 
shapes evolution: much as we examined existing pathways to 
find a perspective from which they appear as trainable systems 
amenable for example to Pavlovian conditioning without any 
structural change [88, 89], evolution can implement behaviorshaping signals that are equivalent to a control perspective 
on its substrate that recognizes its agential affordances and 
seeks to exploit its inherent competencies, not only micromanage the underlying details. Indeed, evolved pathway networks 
show much more capacity for learning than random ones [88, 
89], serving as an example of evolutionary enrichment of such 
properties.
The evolutionary origins of these competencies are an 
active area of study: the field of basal cognition seeks to understand how evolution gives rise to increasing competencies in 
navigating diverse problem spaces [14]. Here, however, the 
focus is on the second half of the loop (Fig. 1): how do these 
problem-solving competencies affect the evolutionary process 
itself? The roles of basal agency in evolution are now beginning to be discussed [77, 220, 221]. Models are being formulated for understanding how each layer of the multiscale 
competency architecture (MCA) of life deforms the option 
space for the layers above and below it (Fig. 7). The abovementioned examples of induced lens cells recruiting others, 
and of artificially large cells using a different molecular mechanism to complete tubulogenesis, demonstrate behavior shaping and top-down control. We can exploit this in engineering 
contexts, but it is certain that evolution discovered the power 
of exploiting these affordances as well. Next, we consider specific ways in which this dynamic drives an evolutionary ratchet 
for problem-solving capacities and makes sure that the results 
of evolution are often not specific solutions to specific environmental niches, but rather general purpose problem-solving 
machines, whose capacities cannot be guessed, or inferred 
from the invariant, default course of development.
Beginner’s mind: self‑organization on the fly 
as the origin of multiscale competency
“If your mind is empty, it is always ready for anything, 
it is open to everything. In the beginner's mind there 
are many possibilities, but in the expert's mind there 
are few.”
― Shunryu Suzuki
Fig. 6   Pattern homeostatic properties of the morphogenetic collective 
agent. A The normal process of rearrangements of the tadpole face to 
make a frog face is not hardwired to specific movements. Embryos 
in which the craniofacial structures are scrambled also make largely 
normal frog [178], which shows that these components form an errorminimization system for the correct target morphology and has the 
competency to reach it even when the initial positions are incorrect. B 
This kind of ability to navigate anatomical morphospace with policies 
beyond hard-coded actions (see the scale of possible competency levels in Fig. 2D) adds an important component to the mainstream openloop scheme of traditional gene regulatory networks driving interactions, which result in emergent complexity at the anatomical level. 
The view of the cellular collective as a cybernetic system, which represents goal states for morphogenesis (see their direct visualization in 
Fig. 4D,E), enables specific research programs to detect, decode, and 
re-write target morphology information without needing to rewire the 
genetic hardware—an attractive prospect for regenerative medicine 
[57, 58, 303]. C The concept of morphological homeostasis during 
regenerative repair could be extended naturally to the broader concept 
of morphological homeorhesis, in which developmental progression 
is a collection of regenerative repairs [57]: each stage is in effect a 
“birth defect” from the perspective of the subsequent stage and is 
“repaired” by regulative development which seeks to minimize error 
(i.e., system-level stress) relative to the bioelectric target morphology. This perspective hypothesizes that the bioelectric target pattern 
changes more rapidly than the transcriptional and anatomical patterns, pulling them along by stress-minimizing loops that have been 
scaled up to act on larger metrics than single-cell stress states [304]. 
Maturation and adulthood result when the bioelectric and biochemical prepatterns stop changing and the anatomy essentially catches 
up and future changes are small-scale maintenance and resistance to 
aging and carcinogenic defections. Panel A taken with permission 
from [178], and courtesy of Erin Switzer. Panel B by Jeremy Guay of 
Peregrine Creative. Panel C by Brenda B. de Groot
◂

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 16 of 33

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 17 of 33 
The standard view of evolution emphasizes two things. 
The first is the cumulative nature of the process—each 
change is made in the context of prior events and thus is 
strongly dependent on history. Concepts like ontogenic 
recapitulation of phylogenetic events stress the fact that 
developmental mechanisms must operate with whatever 
components and signals had been established before (were 
adaptive within the prior historical context of that species). 
This is true, but there is a complementary aspect, because of 
the ubiquitous unexpected scenarios that every embryo has 
to face: environmental changes, genetic mutations, physiological stressors, parasites, and numerous other challenges 
that cannot be planned for in advance. Thus, biological 
systems evolve under pressure to remain flexible enough to 
accomplish coherent morphogenesis despite a wide range 
of perturbations.
This means that the most successful, robust embryogenic 
and regenerative processes must not assume prior states 
strongly. The above-mentioned examples show how little 
embryos can take for granted. They cannot assume how 
many cells they have (ability to regulate pattern despite 
available cell number [222, 223]), the genetic complement 
and size of those cells (polyploid newts [181, 184]), the 
starting position of specific structures (unscrambling frog 
faces [178]), or that earlier molecular signaling steps were 
completed correctly (repair of mis-steps in the left–right 
asymmetry pathway [224]). Evolution uses a mix of prespecified features and “wildcard” phenotypes which are handled by real-time problem-solving [36]. When evolution is 
seen as a long-term learning process [35, 48–50, 225], it 
becomes clear that it does not over-train on its priors: past 
experience shapes development, but for most creatures (with 
exceptions like the mosaic C. elegans), the mechanisms that 
survive are ones that are not hardwired to specific expectations but are ready to operate despite a wide range of noise 
and both internal and external uncertainty [35].
This concept can be encapsulated with the term Play the 
Hand you’re Dealt (PHD): successful developmental systems 
are primed to operate with whatever internal and external 
conditions they are faced as they come into the world (within 
some broad, but limited, range). PHD is why biological systems are highly interoperable with exotic synthetic materials 
[226], why huge mechanistic diversity exists within individuals of an evolutionary type [227], and why viable chimeras 
can be made at every level (from mixing DNA to cell/tissue 
grafts, to parabiosis [24], to hybrots in which brains can be 
used to drive novel robotic bodies or live entirely in virtual 
worlds [174]). This extends to behavior and neuroscience: 
we are all “brains in a vat”, and our neural systems can readily adapt to sensory–motor augmentation with engineered 
devices or novel sense organs [228, 229] because of the fundamental plasticity that requires each being to learn about 
its own form and function in real time. Functional behavior from tail-eyes [176] or third arms [230] or video game 
embodiment all works because developmental processes are 
primed to figure out their sensors, effectors, and architecture 
in real time [231–234].
Genomes not only do not encode large-scale features, but 
they also do not even exclusively encode machinery that 
always makes the same large-scale features: they specify 
cellular hardware that solves problems at multiple scales. 
This includes dynamically setting boundaries between the 
self and external world [108], self-modeling [235, 236], 
and exploiting available problem spaces [86]. In addition 
to homeodynamic loops, biological systems exploit affordances of the laws of physics and computation to benefit 
from the learning capacity of network architectures [34, 46, 
49, 88, 89], the informational scaling provided by strong 
cell:cell coupling [13], and the coordinating capacity of 
competition [141, 142]. All of this could result from the 
multiscale competency architecture, in which systems from 
molecular pathways to whole animals (though not being 
units of selection directly) solve local problems in an active 
manner with diverse degrees of competency [14]. This 
allows evolution to readily pivot through problem spaces 
(Fig. 7), using the same general computational tricks to handle navigation in metabolic, physiological, transcriptional, 
morphological, behavioral, and linguistic spaces [86]. Like 
the principal components describing the activity of artificial 
Fig. 7   Scaling of the morphogenetic agent. A The components of a 
complex morphogenetic system can be thought of as cells with minimal computational abilities, for example the homeostatic capacity 
to keep cell-level parameters (e.g., pH) within certain levels. B For 
the collective intelligence of morphogenesis to competently navigate anatomical morphospace, in addition to cell-level physiological 
space, these subunits have to connect into networks that computationally store much bigger goal states (e.g., rough representations of 
coordinates in anatomical space, or target morphology shapes). It is 
hypothesized here that this occurs via gap junctional dynamics, but 
the details of the scaling of setpoint states are an active area of current research [295, 305–310]. Of course, biochemical and biomechanical modalities are also very likely to be involved in the scaling 
of competencies from subcellular to multicellular problem spaces. 
C In effect, the scaling enables cellular collectives to enlarge their 
“cognitive light cone”—the spatio-temporal scale of the target states 
they are able to pursue, increasing their memories of the past, ability to predict future states from past experience, and the spatial extent 
over which they can measure current states [13]. D Current work is 
ongoing on the open problem of linking these cybernetic perspectives to the biophysics of the state space of the electrical circuit of 
a multicellular tissue, and to central ideas in connectionist machine 
learning which show how a network (excitable medium) can store 
large-scale patterns that are robust to perturbation and can be recovered after damage [57, 58, 270]. E The consilience of computer science approaches to cognition (connectionist models of memories in 
networks), dynamical systems views of systems navigating landscapes, and developmental bioelectricity provide an emergent unification of the notions of memory and recall in morphogenesis and 
behavior. Panels in C,D,E by Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative. 
Embryo panels in D used with permission from [311]
◂

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 18 of 33
neural architectures, these spaces are often not obvious to 
us as external observers. For example, bacteria that can 
take actions such as physical movement, or transcriptional 
changes of enzyme expression, to address dissatisfaction 
with local sugar levels, operate in a hybrid problem space 
with effectors that operate in what we call gene expression 
space and 3D space, respectively.
Successful creatures must operate with a kind of “Beginner’s Mind” with respect to the collective intelligence of 
morphogenesis. There is an interesting parallel here with 
neuroscience, in which behavior is a combination of past 
history and on-the-fly decision-making. Much as each organism must interpret its physical engrams in real time to select 
actions, morphogenesis is a dynamic process that acts by 
interpreting the genetic material with which it must work. 
For example, Xenobot cells interpret the same Xenopus laevis genome in a way that results in kinematic self-replication 
and other behaviors, while standard frog embryos exhibit 
the more common frog-like interpretation. Like in learning, 
the ideal memory is not a recording of microstates (which 
often cannot be reused in other contexts), but a compressed, 
generative representation of what and how to optimize—second-order policies that are usable even when details change.
Morphogenetic problem-solving capacity must be seen at 
a level higher than that of cells. A focus on cellular plasticity 
and cell-cycle checkpoints leads to predictions that animals 
with easy access to undifferentiated cells (e.g., regenerative ones) should be highly prone to cancer; in fact, the true 
situation is the opposite [237]. Animals with robust morphogenetic control due to high levels of plasticity are resistant 
to changes of circumstance (injury) at many scales: they 
regenerate after loss of limbs and organs (degradation of 
body-scale information), they suppress cancer readily [238] 
(degradation of tissue-scale information) and they resist 
aging (degradation of cell-level information).
The best examples of this counter-intuitive dynamic are 
planaria, which not only recover their entire bodies from 
even small fragments, but are very cancer resistant and 
apparently ageless. This raises a crucial puzzle for the traditional view of genomes as specifying form and function. 
Why does this extremely “long-lived” animal (greatly outshining animals like humans or elephants, in which longterm cancer suppression is commonly touted) avoid cancer despite consisting of about one-third its cell number 
as stem cells? Moreover, because planaria often reproduce 
by fission, any mutation that does not kill the stem cell is 
propagated into the next generation and expanded, resulting 
in animals that are mixoploid chimeras with an extremely 
messy genome [239]. How does the animal with the messiest 
genome have the best morphological control?
An evolutionary intelligence ratchet
A possible answer to this puzzle merges the above concepts 
of evolution producing versatile problem-solving machinery. 
Of course, the problem-solving competencies are themselves 
produced by genetically encoded hardware, suggesting the 
view of two kinds of genomic information: that which 
directly specifies phenotypes (e.g., sequence of protein 
enzymes, or structural genome) and that which specifies a 
problem-solving competency (second-order computational 
capacities). This in turn provides a potential explanation for 
planaria. In hardwired individuals, in which the genome 
directly specifies various features of the phenotype, the fitness reveals a lot of information about which genomes are 
most adaptive: selection can see the quality of the structural 
genome. However, in individuals in which the morphogenetic process has competencies (such as adjusting the position of a misplaced mouth, establishing functional vision 
with a tail-eye, or adjusting physiology in light of a stressor 
such as barium), selection has a hard time picking the best 
genomes because some of its successful instances are in fact 
not due to a great structural genome, but to a competency of 
the parts to adjust. Because cells can navigate morphological and physiological spaces, fitness carries less information 
about the structural genome.
It has been suggested that when evolution cannot make 
efficient gains by optimizing the hardwired components, 
the remaining targets for optimization are the competency 
mechanisms themselves [240]. This starts a feedback loop, 
because each gain in competency makes it even harder to 
judge the structural genome, which exacerbates the drive 
toward improving competencies—a ratchet for multiscale 
intelligence that can readily be seen in computational models 
of the process [240]. Planaria, salamanders (which regenerate, but are not immortal), and mammals all represent different degrees of how far this ratchet has operated in their 
lineages, because other forces oppose it (e.g., complexity 
drain [241]). This phenomenon is familiar for example in 
human evolution, in which case evolutionary pressure for the 
largest muscles has been lifted, because the most successful reproducers are ones with high computational capacity 
which use manipulation (e.g., tools, language, and medicine) 
to increase their reproductive success, making it hard for fitness to select for the ones that are physically the most robust.
This model explains a number of very puzzling observations, beyond the fact that the messiest genomes (400 + million years of somatic inheritance) have the most robust 
anatomies—a striking disconnect between genomic and 
morphological stability. For example, it predicts the confirmed fact that there are no known mutant planarian strains 
with abnormal morphologies (the way there are for fruit 
flies, mice, etc.) and explains why the research community 

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 19 of 33 
has had such a hard time (despite decades of efforts) generating transgenic planaria. In this lineage, the ratchet has run all 
the way forward, optimizing mechanisms to create a functional body (almost) no matter what the genome looks like: 
all of the effort has gone into polishing a set of algorithms 
that produce a functional anatomy despite expected noise in 
the components, which then makes it very difficult to create 
change by targeting the genetic level. In fact, the only known 
permanent strains of planaria with an abnormal anatomy are 
two-headed [195] and destabilized (random 1 vs. 2 head) 
forms [193], which were not made by genetic change but 
by manipulating the physiologically implemented software 
that stores pattern memories and guides planarian tissues in 
their navigation of physiological and morphological problem 
spaces. This illustrates the profound link between the course 
of evolution and the dynamically changing competencies 
of its substrate material [37]. In the next section, specific 
implications for the evolutionary process itself are discussed.
Implications of multiscale competency 
for the evolutionary process
“It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor 
the most intelligent that survives. It is the one that is 
the most adaptable to change.”
— Charles Darwin
The multiscale competency architecture (MCA) was foreshadowed in the notion of semiautonomous processes and 
dissociability by Needham, Gould, and others [242–245], 
but it has not heretofore been sufficiently appreciated. The 
ubiquitous embedded agency of evolution’s substrate means 
that the layer between the genotype and selection can make 
up for a wide range of errors and novel circumstances. In 
some cases, the correct species-specific target morphology 
is recreated (e.g., scrambled embryonic frog faces), while in 
other cases a different functional morphotype emerges (e.g., 
Xenobots). The same is true in physiological and transcriptional cases (e.g., planarian barium adaptation). These are 
not merely environment-induced differential developmental 
outcomes, but the ability to reach specific outcomes despite 
internal or external perturbations. Beyond the advantages 
of encapsulated modules and their triggers, the problemsolving capacity of morphogenesis enables the larger system 
to delegate tasks and rely on them being completed in a wide 
range of circumstances that do not have to be anticipated and 
micromanaged. The following are ways in which the MCA 
potentiates, accelerates, and shapes evolutionary processes 
(Fig. 8).
1.	 By providing an agential substrate, MCA speeds the 
evolutionary search for better solutions in several ways. 
Active, modular problem-solving capacity enables the 
following properties for the evolutionary process:
o	
Generalization. By increasing the number of genotypes that all map to the same functional phenotype, 
the partially autonomous generative layer helps evolution generalize [35, 50]. When functionality and 
thus fitness are not tied to a single molecular implementation, significant plasticity and robustness arise 
via exploration of different ways to achieve the same 
goal, generating alternatives which might prove to 
have other advantages. For example, the instructive 
property of resting potential ­(Vmem), distinct from 
the specific ion levels that underlie it, means that 
a bioelectrically controlled morphogenetic function 
can continue unaffected, while evolution experiments with other consequences of swapping out 
different channel proteins in that circuit.
p	
Reliability. Modular agential systems can persist and 
be continuously improved and built upon, because 
the ability of the parts to achieve specific design 
specs enables the other parts to functionally trust 
that they will accomplish their task even when 
changes occur. This makes it practical to invest 
energy in complex regulatory systems. MCA facilitates cooperation (which is not guaranteed by mere 
genetic relatedness [141]) between components and 
across levels of organization by encapsulating complex behaviors in a simple module with a specific 
goal. Systems that have a clear, reliable goal state 
that they can be depended upon to pursue are easier 
to cooperate with, and thus present a lower barrier 
for investment in cooperation.
q	
A more tractable search space. By smoothing the 
fitness landscape, MCA makes the search process 
much more efficient, improving evolvability by 
enabling the search to overcome local maxima. By 
reducing phenotypic differences between different 
genotypes, MCA enables selection to explore the 
consequences of mutations which would otherwise 
be maladaptive. For example, a mutation which 
displaces the mouth, but has some other beneficial 
impact elsewhere, will not result in a dead embryo 
(and thus failure to exploit the other consequences 
of that mutation) because the mouth will self-correct 
[178].
r	
Cryptic variance. MCA makes many mutations 
neutral that would be deleterious in a direct genotype → phenotype architecture. Such mutations 
whose effects are mitigated by developmental regulation are not weeded out; instead, they persist, genM. Levin 
1 3
Page 20 of 33
erating over time a rich pool of diversity that may 
be phenotypically dormant, but can be exploited in 
future. Cryptic variation [74, 246] has been proposed to underlie adaptation to previously unencountered conditions or environments.
s	
Functional intermediates. Goal-directedness (in 
the cybernetic sense) of developmental modules 
helps resolve the problem of useful intermediates, 
because the autonomous problem-solving capacity 
of the parts pushes partial solutions toward an attractor. In On the Origin of Species, Darwin wrote, "If 
it could be demonstrated that any complex organ 
existed which could not possibly have been formed 
by numerous, successive, slight modifications, my 
theory would absolutely break down." Many scenarios which, in a flat architecture, would result in 
an in-between state with low fitness, instead, end 
up in a useful attractor state because of the “do until 

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 21 of 33 
condition X is met” character of homeostatic and 
homeodynamic loops.
2.	 Implications for the inverse problem. An intervening 
developmental control layer can help mitigate the nonlinear relationship between genotype and phenotype 
at the micro level by providing a more linear relationship between control signals exerted at higher levels of 
organization and phenotypes.
o	
More linear controls. It is likely that a layer of 
cybernetic competency makes the relationship 
between genotype and phenotype more linear [20, 
247]—addressing the difficult inverse problem of 
selecting which genes must mutate to reach a system-level outcome. This potentially empowers epigenetic mechanisms that go beyond a completely 
blind search of the genetic space. By encapsulating 
the chaotic (in the mathematical sense) relationships 
between changing local rules and emergent outcomes into modules with distinct goals, the system 
becomes easier to control via a combination of topdown encoded goal states and bottom-up emergence.
	
  As described above, morphogenetic goal state 
encodings (such as bioelectric prepatterns) can be 
re-written despite a wild-type genome. Keeping 
such goal state encodings functionally orthogonal 
(independently modifiable) from the machine that 
executes them is a powerful architecture exploited 
by computer science. This separation, complementing feed-forward emergence, progressively minimizes the inverse problem at each pair of layers, 
allowing much more efficient functional architectures.
p	
Facilitating credit assignment between changes and 
positive outcomes. Evolution does not have to wait 
until a solution is found that improves one property while not impairing others—it can exploit the 
much easier route of testing out properties, while the 
error-correcting competencies of underlying modules mitigate the fact that most genes have many 
different roles [248]. MCA helps handle the fact 
that it is very hard for any optimization process to 
make progress when each change has many different 
consequences, by reducing the need for determining 
individual contributions for each control signal.
3.	 MCA’s modularity confers both robustness and hackability.
o	
More control at the higher levels, less at the lower. 
The advantages of robustness (making some components controllable by other components) result in 
encapsulation of cybernetic modules which are more 
controllable in specific ways (goal rewriting, behavior shaping), but less controllable in their details 
(they resist noise and intervention, and sometimes 
have novel unpredictable behaviors—a hallmark of 
the primitive roots of agency). It may be far easier for evolution to exploit complex outcomes by 
making changes in the setpoint information (e.g., 
by manipulating ion channel structure) than by trying to micromanage local rules that are many steps 
away from system-level outcomes. Future work will 
measure the relative improvement in edit distance 
[249] between highly fit organisms in bottom-up vs. 
behavior-shaping evolutionary approaches.
p	
Evolutionary pressure to detect ‘hijacking’. However, the increased controllability, and thus reprogrammability, of components is also a potential target for exploitation by parasites and various cheaters 
[250], as it makes it that much easier to control complex outcomes in host or conspecific behavior. This 
in turn sets up an evolutionary pressure for systems 
Fig. 8   Summary of the evolutionary perspective on morphological 
competency. A It is well appreciated that evolutionary dynamics have 
scaled intelligence, from the primitive capacities of microbes to the 
metacognition of modern humans. However, it is suggested here that 
the process is symmetrical: the intelligence of the components (i.e., 
problem-solving capacity) potentiates the evolutionary process, forming a ratchet that enhances this capacity while it makes it harder for 
selection to see the structural genome [240]. B It is suggested here 
that the multiscale competency architecture (the cybernetic nature of 
each layer) enables evolution to pivot across problem spaces, using 
the same navigation policies to solve problems in metabolic, physiological, transcriptional, morphogenetic, and 3D spaces (the latter 
being the traditional space of “behavior”). For example, the (bioelectric) computations of neural networks that control muscles to 
move the body through 3D space emerged from much earlier usage 
of those same mechanisms and algorithms to control other cell types 
[145] to navigate the configuration state of the body through anatomical morphospace despite novel circumstances (examples in Figs. 5,6) 
[86]. Blue arrows symbolize how evolution scaled up each type of 
control into a new, larger space. The intelligence-focused lens on 
the co-developmental process suggests that the competency of the 
layer between genotype and phenotype (developmental physiology) 
greatly smooths the rugged (C) evolutionary landscape, resulting (D) 
in a faster search and exploration for novel capabilities. The ability 
of cellular and tissue-level agents to accomplish their tasks in their 
respective problem spaces despite unpredictable changes enables 
many mutations that would otherwise have been deleterious to be 
neutral, as the system adjusts and enables evolution to explore other, 
potentially positive effects of pleiotropic mutations. Mutation is thus 
just one of many internal and external perturbations that deviate the 
body from a target morphology—a ubiquitous stressor that needs to 
be dealt with on developmental and evolutionary timescales. On this 
view, regenerative capacity is not a novel solution to external damage, 
but an ancient, ubiquitous aspect of homeostasis that enables developmental progression, regulative morphogenesis, and also efficient evolutionary search. Panels B, C, D used with permission from Jeremy 
Guay of Peregrine Creative.
◂

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 22 of 33
to model their own functionality (causality) to detect 
when their control circuits are being changed internally or externally. This reinforces the boundaries 
between self and world (individuation) and may 
have many consequences for cognitive capacities in 
more advanced life forms.
4.	 MCA facilitates evolutionary creativity.
o	
Pivots to novel problem spaces. Another way evolution can exploit the benefits of the MCA is by changing the measurement component of the homeostatic 
loops, which generates novel functions (and thus 
jumps across the fitness landscape) by providing 
new perspectives—new ways one component (or the 
larger system) can control and exploit on an existing 
mechanism—polycomputation [42]. More broadly, 
useful computational functions, such as associative 
memory, can be derived from a gene-regulatory network without changing the structure of the network 
(and thus without any possibility of adversely affecting any dependents). A mechanism that interprets its 
outcomes in a particular way (maps specific nodes 
to the functional elements in an associative conditioning paradigm for example, [88, 89]) is readily 
evolved and modified, and provides a way for evolution to squeeze additional benefits from existing 
components without the negative consequences for 
other internal observers (subsystems), thus keeping 
prior gains. Future work must examine the role of 
perception (in the active inference sense) and polycomputing in potentiating evolutionary advances, to 
see how much of the effort of evolutionary optimization is spent tweaking the measurement, setpoint, or 
actuation machinery of homeostatic loops.
p	
The competency ratchet described above [240] and 
the facilitation of complex high-level control loops 
by the modularity of the test–operate–exit loops 
of homeostatic mechanisms go beyond simple 
problem-solving. They also help evolution address 
novel opportunities—open-ended [251] exploration 
of new spaces and selection of novel problems to 
solve, not just better ways to solve the same problem. One example of this is the ability of planaria to 
find transcriptional paths to resolve an entirely novel 
physiological stressor (barium) [90]. Another is the 
ability of Xenobots made of wild-type Xenopus laevis cells to perform kinematic replication (which, to 
our knowledge, no other organism does), suggesting 
that more focus needs to be placed on how allostasis, homeorhesis [252], and autonomization [253] 
not only guide navigation in an established problem 
space using developmental motifs (a.k.a., behavioral modules in anatomical morphospace), but also 
enable pivoting across novel spaces—a hallmark of 
early agency. Fundamentally, problem spaces and 
goals exist from the perspective of an observer (a 
subsystem exploiting a perspective for adaptive 
advantage). Thus, it is essential to develop an understanding of the dynamics which enable, scale up, 
and transform the proto-cognitive/computational 
boundaries of evolved and designed agents.
Conclusion
"A smooth sea never made a skilled sailor"
— Franklin D. Roosevelt
It is no coincidence that Alan Turing was interested in 
both the question of intelligence in radically unconventional 
embodiments [254], and the question of self-organization 
of biological form during embryogenesis [255]. In a deep 
sense, they are the same question, seeking to understand 
the ability of matter to support reprogrammable, softwarelevel (physiological) information processing that provides 
context-sensitive behavior for changing inputs. Turing’s 
modeling of self-organization in a chemical medium dovetails with the fact that an egg genome does not specify one 
embryo in a hardwired manner. Cell sheets that express 
genetically provided hardware are capable of giving rise 
to 0, 1, or several autopoietic systems that set their own 
boundaries in the excitable medium of the early blastoderm 
[256]—the most basic example of the flexibility of the product of the evolutionary process.
Biological systems exhibit cybernetic competencies in 
diverse problem spaces, which scale up from the most minimal behaviors of molecular components [257–260] via a 
process of evolutionary enrichment for computational flexibility and controllability. The fact that the substrate on which 
evolution works is an agential material [37] means that evolution is searching not only the space of micro-level phenotypic outcomes, but also the smoother, lower-dimensional 
space of behavior-shaping signals for control of modules 
that encapsulate complexity behind simple interfaces like 
the homeostatic control loop. This also allows evolution to 
bridge the sim-to-real gap—a problem that plagues roboticists and engineers, in which the environment is constantly 
surprising no matter how rich the prior training set was [261, 
262]. In overloading [42] the same genetic hardware with 
multiple interpretations [125, 126, 197], the physiological machinery of chemical and cellular networks ensures 
that evolution does not over-train on prior data, but compresses and generalizes. Evolution crosses the gap between 
prior experience and adaptive novelty [261] by not relying 
too much on a lineage’s prior experience (which, like our 

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 23 of 33 
simulations, often fail to recapitulate everything we need to 
know in the future), but rather by exploiting problem-solving 
competencies of modules at different scales.
The evolutionary process seems to have been enriched 
for computational capacity, starting at the level of molecular pathways [88, 89, 263]. It is likely that molecular and 
tissue-level intelligence is favored for the same reason that 
nervous systems have been so successful: they enable context-sensitive computation that cannot be pre-specified in 
the protein-level encoding of the DNA. Biology has many 
examples of remarkable compression of complex events into 
molecular representations [264–267], and the converse—
cross-scale decoding: these need to be better understood. 
In fact, even living systems that do not seem to offer much 
plasticity and whose MCA capacities seem very low (e.g., 
C. elegans) cannot be guaranteed to be as hardwired as they 
first appear. It is an essential aspect of intelligence that its 
detection (or lack thereof) says as much about the observer 
as it does about the system itself [14, 86]; moreover, the 
vast bulk of research in development and even physiology 
in model systems has not specifically probed for problemsolving in diverse spaces. It is entirely possible that more 
sophisticated attempts to uncover such dynamics in novel 
spaces will yield surprises in model systems that are not 
known for their MCA capabilities.
How do the molecular events brought on by injecting a 
frog’s egg with an odorant molecule become expanded into 
a nervous system architecture which controls muscles to 
behaviorally seek out that odorant as an adult frog [268]? 
All of the above suggests that MCA enables evolution to 
search a simpler, smoother, more powerful space—the space 
of signals and rewards—rather than the high-dimensional 
space of individual local hardware states. Examples that 
support this extend all the way down to the cybernetic properties of chemical pathways, such as learning and habituation [87–89, 269]. By shaping signals that are interpreted by 
modules with various degrees of memory and decision-making ability, both evolution and engineers can take advantage 
of the MCA [270]. The ability of biology to move salient 
information across scales, problem spaces, and mechanistic 
implementations is likely key to the efficiency and power 
of evolution.
Homeostatic control cycles may facilitate such scaling of 
complexity and intelligence because of their functional and 
semantic modularity: for example, a setpoint can easily be 
changed from a metabolic (cell-level) metric to a measure 
of planar polarity alignment (tissue level), while keeping 
everything else the same. The ability to independently swap 
out the measurements, comparison function, and setpoints of 
a homeostatic loop means that a very wide variety of highlevel strategies can be readily tested out by evolution. This 
is the same advantage engineers and end users reap from 
homeostats: overall function can be rapidly changed without 
needing many alterations of the underlying hardware by for 
example rewriting the setpoint (such as when the genetically 
wild-type planarian’s bioelectric pattern memory is briefly 
re-set to a two-head pattern by a simple ion channel-targeting stimulus, resulting in a permanent line of worms which 
reliably build to the new setpoint pattern when fissioning or 
amputated [194]).
The modulation of the evolutionary process by behavioral 
intelligence in animals (and science-capable humans) was 
long predated by a similar process taking place outside the 
brain: the diverse intelligence of morphogenetic processes 
operating in anatomical space. The fact that evolution not 
only finds solutions to specific problems, but also creates 
somewhat generic problem-solving machines, with multiple 
diverse (simultaneously existing [42]) capabilities, has many 
implications for the evolutionary process itself. It facilitates 
credit assignment for the evolutionary search process, enables exploration and novelty [4, 271], and hugely accelerates 
the process of increasing complexity. This feedback between 
evolutionary scaling of intelligence and the acceleration 
of the discovery of novelty by evolution forms a powerful 
ratchet [240], which is compatible with the emerging picture 
of a continuum of basal cognition across the tree of life [14].
Future directions for research
This perspective suggests a unifying lens for aspects of evolutionary developmental biology and engineering [272], 
focused on the idea of hacking the agential interfaces of 
components instead of micro-managing design. Like parasites, body tissues, and evolution itself, bioengineers and 
roboticists have the opportunity to develop a science of 
control by exploiting competencies as affordances, applicable equally to the direct products of evolution and to the 
second-order creative process in which evolved humans partake. Future appliances in this field will be potentiated by 
universal APIs that go beyond object-oriented programming 
to goal-oriented programming to exploit biological architectures and offer similar advantages to designed digital 
systems (as well as hybrid platforms). A number of future 
research programs can now be pursued.
With respect to theory, much needs to be done to connect these ideas to the body of work on evolutionary units 
of selection [273, 274], and on natural induction [47]. Tools 
need to be developed to identify virtual governors [57, 275] 
as evolutionary forces and to quantify what spaces evolutionary processes are really searching [86]. Computational 
modeling and synthetic biological systems are now primed 
to address the dynamics of cognitive scaling and the impacts 
thereof on the competency of the search process itself, via 
computational models that explicitly blend low-level competencies with an evolutionary cycle [240, 276]. Some of the 

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 24 of 33
biggest questions concern the latent space of homeodynamic 
goals at different scales, and where these setpoints come 
from, when not directly specified by genome or environment 
[271, 272, 277–279]. It is likely that generic principles of 
inherent laws of biomechanics, bioelectrics, and information 
processing [62–64, 132, 280–284] will be key parts of the 
roadmap to flesh out the bi-directional relationship between 
multiscale intelligence and evolution.
It should be noted that the evolutionary consequences 
of agential matter were here explored from the perspective 
of an addition to what is otherwise treated as a fully mainstream picture of the evolutionary process itself. However, 
in future work, this perspective should be merged with currently developing alternative views of evolution, to determine what implications it has for those frameworks. Other 
non-traditional [28, 60, 285, 286] evolutionary dynamics could perhaps also be greatly facilitated by the ability of cells to solve novel problems using transcriptional 
responses. One example is the ready fit of these ideas into 
the emerging framework of natural induction [35, 47], which 
seeks invariants between the evolutionary process and that of 
learning broadly conceived. Another has to do with so-called 
Lamarckian effects [28, 60, 286]. For example, consider the 
case of regulating the small number of relevant genes to 
resolve a novel stressor, as in the barium-exposed planaria 
[90]. This provides clear evidence that cells can sometimes 
solve the hardest part of reversing the central dogma—the 
credit assignment needed to know which genes to edit to 
enrich for specific outcomes. Once the relevant transcripts 
are identified by computational processes at the transcriptional level, making genomic edits at those loci could in 
principle be done by straightforward, familiar mechanisms 
(akin to reverse transcriptase, CRISPR, trans-generational 
chromatin modifications, etc.). Whether this in fact occurs 
in vivo represents an exciting future direction for experimental research.
Impacts beyond evolutionary biology
Specific impacts of the above ideas will go far beyond evolutionary biology, for example, to applications in regenerative 
medicine which will increasingly exploit the decision-making capabilities of cells and tissues, in addition to traditional 
bottom-up molecular rewiring [160]. Beyond the life sciences, engineering is now heavily reliant on evolutionary 
approaches to design [287–289], and robust future robotics 
and AI architectures must mimic the multiscale competency 
architecture to achieve (and surpass) the functionality of 
natural systems. Importantly, connectionist AI architectures 
are not only the beneficiaries of these ideas, but are also a 
key developing toolkit for the emerging field of basal cognition because of the “impedance match” needed between a 
phenomenon and the tools used to study it. Physicists use 
low-agency, mechanical tools to observe the natural world, 
and inevitably arrive at low-agency mechanistic models. 
Taking full advantage of virtual governors, proto-cognitive 
modules, and other aspects of the software of life requires 
tools that recognize and learn to hack these capacities. 
Agency cannot be directly observed with a microscope, but 
brains, evolutionary processes, and emerging machine learning tools are primed to detect and exploit it via agential models of control because they themselves are higher-agency 
systems.
As foreseen by many workers since the beginnings of 
thought on evolution, intelligence is key to evolutionary 
change. Recent consilience of a range of disciplines are giving rise to the field of diverse intelligence, which recognizes 
a spectrum of problem-solving and creative competencies 
in unconventional, basal media that goes beyond the old 
dichotomy of “dumb mechanical machine vs. high-level true 
intelligence”. This finally makes it possible to incorporate a 
naturalistic, non-reductive, empirically useful conception of 
intelligence into modern theories of evolutionary change. It 
also naturally leads to hypotheses that whole lineages, and 
perhaps even the evolutionary process itself, can be viewed 
as proto-cognitive, cybernetic agents, by characterizing the 
competencies of the search dynamics using the language of 
cognitive and behavioral science such as active inference 
and Hebbian learning [35, 48, 290–292]. What is becoming 
increasingly clear is that intelligence is not some latecomer 
that arrives with the appearance of big brains—it is baked 
in at the very beginning [293, 294], present at multiple 
scales of the biological substrate of evolution, and continuously shapes its course in a fluid dance that potentiates all 
participants.
Acknowledgements  I thank Joshua Bongard, Chris Fields, Richard 
Gawne, Benedict Hartl, Hananel Hazan, Helmut Hauser, Eva Jablonka, 
Timothy Jackson, Santosh Manicka, Kelly McLaughlin, Stuart Newman, Ted Pavlic, Maria Petersen, and William Ratcliff for many helpful 
discussions and references to specific examples; and Julia Poirier for 
editorial assistance.
Author contributions  ML: wrote the entire paper.
Funding  This publication was made possible through the support 
of Grant 62212 from the John Templeton Foundation. The opinions 
expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the John Templeton Foundation.
Availability of data and material  N/A.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest  N/A.
Ethical approval  N/A.
Consent to participate  N/A.

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 25 of 33 
Consent for publication  N/A.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
	 1.	 Noble D (2022) Modern physiology vindicates Darwin’s dream. 
Exp Physiol 107(9):1015–1028. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1113/​EP090​
	 2.	 Wagner GP, Pavlicev M, Cheverud JM (2007) The road to modularity. Nat Rev Genet 8(12):921–931. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
nrg22​67
	 3.	 Schlosser G, Wagner GP (2004) Modularity in development and 
evolution. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
	 4.	 Calabretta R, Ferdinando AD, Wagner GP, Parisi D (2003) What 
does it take to evolve behaviorally complex organisms? Biosystems 69(2–3):245–262. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​s0303-​2647(02)​
00140-5
	 5.	 Laubichler MD, Wagner GP (2001) How molecular is molecular 
developmental biology? A reply to Alex Rosenberg’s reductionism redux: computing the embryo. Biol Philos 16(1):53–68. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1023/a:​10067​50126​784
	 6.	 Gerhart J, Kirschner M (2007) The theory of facilitated variation. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104(Suppl 1):8582–8589. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​07010​35104
	 7.	 Gordon R, Stone R (2017) Cybernetic embryo. In: Seckbach J, 
Gordon R (eds) Biocommunication: sign-mediated interactions 
between cells and organisms. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 111–164
	 8.	 Apter MJ (1966) Cybernetics and development. Pergamon Press, 
New York
	 9.	 Grossberg S (1978) Communication, memory, and development. 
In: Snell F (ed) Rosen R Progress in Theoretical Biology. Academic Press, Cambridge, pp 183–232
	 10.	 Dodig-Crnkovic G (2022) Cognition as morphological/morphogenetic embodied computation in vivo. Entropy (Basel) 
24(11):1576. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​e2411​1576
	 11.	 Levin M (2023) collective intelligence of morphogenesis as a 
teleonomic process. In: Corning PA, Kauffman SA, Noble D, 
Shapiro JA, Vane-Wright RI, Pross A (eds) Evolution “on purpose”: teleonomy in living systems. MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 
175–198
	 12.	 Levin M (2021) Life, death, and self: Fundamental questions 
of primitive cognition viewed through the lens of body plasticity and synthetic organisms. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 
564:114–133. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​bbrc.​2020.​10.​077
	 13.	 Levin M (2019) The computational boundary of a “self”: developmental bioelectricity drives multicellularity and scale-free 
cognition. Front Psychol 10:2688. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fpsyg.​
2019.​02688
	 14.	 Levin M (2022) Technological approach to mind everywhere: an 
experimentally-grounded framework for understanding diverse 
bodies and minds. Front Syst Neurosci 16:768201. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​3389/​fnsys.​2022.​768201
	 15.	 Furusawa C, Kaneko K (1998) Emergence of rules in cell society: differentiation, hierarchy, and stability. Bull Math Biol 
60(4):659–687. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1006/​bulm.​1997.​0034
	 16.	 Sonnenschein C, Soto AM (1999) The society of cells: cancer 
control of cell proliferation. Springer, Oxford, New York
	 17.	 McMillen P, Oudin MJ, Levin M, Payne SL (2021) Beyond neurons: long distance communication in development and cancer. 
Front Cell Dev Biol. 9:739024. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fcell.​
2021.​739024
	 18.	 Rubin H (1990) On the nature of enduring modifications induced 
in cells and organisms. Am J Physiol 258(2 Pt 1):L19-24. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1152/​ajplu​ng.​1990.​258.2.​L19
	 19.	 Rubin H (2007) Ordered heterogeneity and its decline in cancer 
and aging. Adv Cancer Res 98:117–147. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​
S0065-​230X(06)​98004-X
	 20.	 Lobo D, Solano M, Bubenik GA, Levin M (2014) A linearencoding model explains the variability of the target morphology 
in regeneration. J R Soc Interface 11(92):20130918. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1098/​rsif.​2013.​0918
	 21.	 Sabour D, Scholer HR (2012) Reprogramming and the mammalian germline: the Weismann barrier revisited. Curr Opin Cell 
Biol 24(6):716–723. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​ceb.​2012.​08.​006
	 22.	 Jablonka E, Lamb MJ (1995) Epigenetic inheritance and evolution : the Lamarckian dimension. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, New York
	 23.	 Jablonka E (1994) Inheritance systems and the evolution of new 
levels of individuality. J Theor Biol 170(3):301–309. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1006/​jtbi.​1994.​1191
	 24.	 Nanos V, Levin M (2022) Multi-scale Chimerism: an experimental window on the algorithms of anatomical control. Cells Dev. 
169:203764. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cdev.​2021.​203764
	 25.	 Godfrey-Smith P (2017) The subject as cause and effect of evolution. Interface Focus 7(5):20170022. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rsfs.​
2017.​0022
	 26.	 Newman SA (2016) “Biogeneric” developmental processes: drivers of major transitions in animal evolution. Philos Trans R Soc 
Lond B Biol Sci 371(1701):20150443. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​
rstb.​2015.​0443
	 27.	 Santos M, Szathmáry E, Fontanari JF (2015) Phenotypic plasticity, the Baldwin effect, and the speeding up of evolution: the 
computational roots of an illusion. J Theor Biol 371:127–136. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jtbi.​2015.​02.​012
	 28.	 Jablonka E, Lamb MJ (2015) The inheritance of acquired epigenetic variations. Int J Epidemiol 44(4):1094–1103. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1093/​ije/​dyv020
	 29.	 Kull K (2014) Adaptive evolution without natural selection. Biol 
J Linn Soc 112(2):287–294. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​bij.​12124
	 30.	 Moore LS, Stolovicki E, Braun E (2013) Population dynamics 
of metastable growth-rate phenotypes. PLoS ONE 8(12):e81671. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​00816​71
	 31.	 Newman SA, Bhat R (2009) Dynamical patterning modules: a 
“pattern language” for development and evolution of multicellular form. Int J Dev Biol 53(5–6):693–705. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1387/​ijdb.​07248​1sn
	 32.	 Ho MW, Saunders PT, Fox SW (1987) Through a neo-Darwinian 
glass darkly. BioEssays 6(1):3–4. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​bies.​
95006​0102
	 33.	 Noble D (2017) Dance to the tune of life: biological relativity. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
	 34.	 Watson RA, Mills R, Buckley CL, Kouvaris K, Jackson A, Powers ST, Cox C, Tudge S, Davies A, Kounios L, Power D (2016) 
Evolutionary connectionism: algorithmic principles underlying 
the evolution of biological organisation in evo-devo evo-eco and 

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 26 of 33
evolutionary transitions. Evol Biol 43(4):553–581. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s11692-​015-​9358-z
	 35.	 Kouvaris K, Clune J, Kounios L, Brede M, Watson RA (2017) 
How evolution learns to generalise: Using the principles of learning theory to understand the evolution of developmental organisation. PLoS Comput Biol 13(4):e1005358. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1371/​journ​al.​pcbi.​10053​58
	 36.	 Hinton GE, Nowlan J (1987) How learning can guide evolution. 
Complex Syst 1(3):495–502
	 37.	 Davies J, Levin M (2023) Synthetic morphology with agential 
materials. Nat Rev Bioeng 1(1):46–59. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
s44222-​022-​00001-9
	 38.	 Heylighen F (2013) Self-organization in communicating groups: 
the emergence of coordination, shared references and collective 
intelligence. In: Massip-Bonet À, Bastardas-Boada A (eds) Complexity perspectives on language, communication and society. 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 117–149
	 39.	 Couzin I (2007) Collective minds. Nature 445(7129):715. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1038/​44571​5a
	 40.	 Chandebois R (1980) Cell sociology and the problem of automation in the development of pluricellular animals. Acta Biotheor 
29(1):1–35. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​BF000​45880
	 41.	 James W (1890) The principles of psychology. H. Holt and company, New York
	 42.	 Bongard J, Levin M (2023) There’s plenty of room right here: 
biological systems as evolved, overloaded multi-scale machines. 
Biomimetics 8(1):110. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​biomi​metic​s8010​
	 43.	 Fields C, Levin M (2020) Scale-free biology: integrating evolutionary and developmental thinking. BioEssays 42(8):e1900228. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​bies.​20190​0228
	 44.	 McFadden J (2002) The conscious electromagnetic information 
(Cemi) field theory—the hard problem made easy? J Conscious 
Stud 9(8):45–60
	 45.	 McFadden J, Al-Khalili J (1999) A quantum mechanical model 
of adaptive mutation. Biosystems 50(3):203–211. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1016/​s0303-​2647(99)​00004-0
	 46.	 Watson RA, Levin M, Buckley CL (2022) Design for an individual: connectionist approaches to the evolutionary transitions 
in individuality. Front Ecol Evol 10:823588. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
3389/​fevo.​2022.​823588
	 47.	 Buckley CL, Lewens T, Levin M, Millidge B, Tschantz A, Watson RA (2023) Natural Induction. Manuscript in preparation.
	 48.	 Watson RA, Szathmáry E (2016) How can evolution learn? 
Trends Ecol Evol 31(2):147–157. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​tree.​
2015.​11.​009
	 49.	 Power DA, Watson RA, Szathmáry E, Mills R, Powers ST, Doncaster CP, Czapp B (2015) What can ecosystems learn? Expanding evolutionary ecology with learning theory. Biol Direct 10:69. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s13062-​015-​0094-1
	 50.	 Watson RA, Wagner GP, Pavlicev M, Weinreich DM, Mills R 
(2014) The evolution of phenotypic correlations and “developmental memory.” Evolution 68(4):1124–1138. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1111/​evo.​12337
	 51.	 Timsit Y, Gregoire SP (2021) Towards the idea of molecular 
brains. Int J Mol Sci 22(21):11868. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ijms2​
22111​868
	 52.	 Balázsi G, van Oudenaarden A, Collins JJ (2011) Cellular decision making and biological noise: from microbes to mammals. 
Cell 144(6):910–925. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cell.​2011.​01.​030
	 53.	 Lyon P, Keijzer F, Arendt D, Levin M (2021) Reframing cognition: getting down to biological basics. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 
B Biol Sci 376(1820):20190750. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rstb.​
2019.​0750
	 54.	 Lyon P (2006) The biogenic approach to cognition. Cogn Process 
7(1):11–29. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10339-​005-​0016-8
	 55.	 Baluška F, Levin M (2016) On having no head: cognition 
throughout biological systems. Front Psychol 7:902. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​3389/​fpsyg.​2016.​00902
	 56.	 Levin M, Pezzulo G, Finkelstein JM (2017) Endogenous bioelectric signaling networks: exploiting voltage gradients for control 
of growth and form. Annu Rev Biomed Eng 19:353–387. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1146/​annur​ev-​bioeng-​071114-​040647
	 57.	 Pezzulo G, Levin M (2016) Top-down models in biology: explanation and control of complex living systems above the molecular level. J R Soc Interface 13(124):20160555. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1098/​rsif.​2016.​0555
	 58.	 Pezzulo G, Levin M (2015) Re-membering the body: applications of computational neuroscience to the top-down control 
of regeneration of limbs and other complex organs. Integr Biol 
7(12):1487–1517. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1039/​c5ib0​0221d
	 59.	 Schreier HI, Soen Y, Brenner N (2017) Exploratory adaptation 
in large random networks. Nat Commun 8:14826. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1038/​ncomm​s14826
	 60.	 Soen Y, Knafo M, Elgart M (2015) A principle of organization which facilitates broad Lamarckian-like adaptations by 
improvisation. Biol Direct 10:68. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​
s13062-​015-​0097-y
	 61.	 Soen Y (2014) Environmental disruption of host-microbe coadaptation as a potential driving force in evolution. Front Genet 
5:168. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fgene.​2014.​00168
	 62.	 Newman SA (2019) Inherency of form and function in animal 
development and evolution. Front Physiol 10:702. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​3389/​fphys.​2019.​00702
	 63.	 Newman SA (2019) Inherency and homomorphy in the evolution 
of development. Curr Opin Genet Dev 57:1–8. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​gde.​2019.​05.​006
	 64.	 Kauffman S, Clayton P (2006) On emergence, agency, and 
organization. Biol Philos 21(4):501–521. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s10539-​005-​9003-9
	 65.	 Kauffman SA (1993) The origins of order: self organization and 
selection in evolution. Oxford University Press, New York
	 66.	 Kauffman SA, Johnsen S (1991) Coevolution to the edge of 
chaos: coupled fitness landscapes, poised states, and coevolutionary avalanches. J Theor Biol 149(4):467–505. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1016/​s0022-​5193(05)​80094-3
	 67.	 Chvykov P, Berrueta TA, Vardhan A, Savoie W, Samland A, 
Murphey TD, Wiesenfeld K, Goldman DI, England JL (2021) 
Low rattling: A predictive principle for self-organization in 
active collectives. Science 371(6524):90–95. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1126/​scien​ce.​abc61​82
	 68.	 Perunov N, Marsland RA, England JL (2016) Statistical physics 
of adaptation. Phys Rev X 6(2):021036. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1103/​
PhysR​evX.6.​021036
	 69.	 Ginsburg S, Jablonka E (2021) Evolutionary transitions in 
learning and cognition. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
376(1821):20190766. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rstb.​2019.​0766
	 70.	 Jablonka E (2017) The evolutionary implications of epigenetic 
inheritance. Interface Focus 7(5):20160135. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1098/​rsfs.​2016.​0135
	 71.	 Bourrat P, Lu Q, Jablonka E (2017) Why the missing heritability 
might not be in the DNA. BioEssays 39(7):1700067. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1002/​bies.​20170​0067
	 72.	 Ginsburg S, Jablonka E (2015) The teleological transitions in 
evolution: a gantian view. J Theor Biol 381:55–60. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​jtbi.​2015.​04.​007
	 73.	 Laland K, Uller T, Feldman M, Sterelny K, Müller GB, Moczek 
A, Jablonka E, Odling-Smee J, Wray GA, Hoekstra HE, Futuyma 
DJ, Lenski RE, Mackay TF, Schluter D, Strassmann JE (2014) 

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 27 of 33 
Does evolutionary theory need a rethink? Nature 514(7521):161–
164. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​51416​1a
	 74.	 Rohner N, Jarosz DF, Kowalko JE, Yoshizawa M, Jeffery WR, 
Borowsky RL, Lindquist S, Tabin CJ (2013) Cryptic variation in 
morphological evolution: HSP90 as a capacitor for loss of eyes in 
cavefish. Science 342(6164):1372–1375. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​
scien​ce.​12402​76
	 75.	 West-Eberhard MJ (2005) Phenotypic accommodation: adaptive 
innovation due to developmental plasticity. J Exp Zool B Mol 
Dev Evol 304(6):610–618. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​jez.b.​21071
	 76.	 West-Eberhard MJ (1998) Evolution in the light of developmental and cell biology, and vice versa. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
95(15):8417–8419. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​95.​15.​8417
	 77.	 Sultan SE, Moczek AP, Walsh D (2022) Bridging the explanatory 
gaps: What can we learn from a biological agency perspective? 
BioEssays 44(1):e2100185. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​bies.​20210​
	 78.	 Moczek AP, Sultan S, Foster S, Ledón-Rettig C, Dworkin I, 
Nijhout HF, Abouheif E, Pfennig DW (2011) The role of developmental plasticity in evolutionary innovation. Proc Biol Sci 
278(1719):2705–2713. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rspb.​2011.​0971
	 79.	 Miller WB Jr, Baluška F, Torday JS (2020) Cellular senomic 
measurements in cognition-based evolution. Prog Biophys Mol 
Biol 156:20–33. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​pbiom​olbio.​2020.​07.​
	 80.	 Baluška F, Reber AS, Miller WB Jr (2022) Cellular sentience as 
the primary source of biological order and evolution. Biosystems 
218:104694. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​biosy​stems.​2022.​104694
	 81.	 Baluška F, Miller WB, Reber AS (2022) Cellular and evolutionary perspectives on organismal cognition: from unicellular to 
multicellular organisms. Biol J Linn Soc. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​
bioli​nnean/​blac0​05
	 82.	 Baluška F, Miller WB Jr (2018) Senomic view of the cell: 
senome versus genome. Commun Integr Biol 11(3):1–9. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1080/​19420​889.​2018.​14891​84
	 83.	 Standen EM, Du TY, Larsson HC (2014) Developmental plasticity and the origin of tetrapods. Nature 513(7516):54–58. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1038/​natur​e13708
	 84.	 Ledón-Rettig CC, Pfennig DW, Crespi EJ (2010) Diet and hormonal manipulation reveal cryptic genetic variation: implications for the evolution of novel feeding strategies. Proc Biol Sci 
277(1700):3569–3578. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rspb.​2010.​0877
	 85.	 Sommer RJ (2020) Phenotypic plasticity: from theory and 
genetics to current and future challenges. Genetics 215(1):1–13. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1534/​genet​ics.​120.​303163
	 86.	 Fields C, Levin M (2022) Competency in navigating arbitrary 
spaces as an invariant for analyzing cognition in diverse embodiments. Entropy 24(6):819. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​e2406​0819
	 87.	 Watson RA, Buckley CL, Mills R, Davies A (2010) Associative memory in gene regulation networks. In: Proceedings of the 
12th International Conference on the Synthesis and Simulation 
of Living Systems (Odense Denmark). MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA. pp. 194–201
	 88.	 Biswas S, Clawson W, Levin M (2023) Learning in transcriptional network models: computational discovery of pathway-level 
memory and effective interventions. Int J Mol Sci 24(1):285. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ijms2​40102​85
	 89.	 Biswas S, Manicka S, Hoel E, Levin M (2021) Gene regulatory networks exhibit several kinds of memory: quantification of 
memory in biological and random transcriptional networks. iScience. 24(3):102131. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​isci.​2021.​102131
	 90.	 Emmons-Bell M, Durant F, Tung A, Pietak A, Miller K, Kane A, 
Martyniuk CJ, Davidian D, Morokuma J, Levin M (2019) Regenerative adaptation to electrochemical perturbation in planaria: a 
molecular analysis of physiological plasticity. iScience 22:147–
165. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​isci.​2019.​11.​014
	 91.	 Vallverdú J, Castro O, Mayne R, Talanov M, Levin M, Baluška 
F, Gunji Y, Dussutour A, Zenil H, Adamatzky A (2018) Slime 
mould: the fundamental mechanisms of biological cognition. 
Biosystems 165:57–70. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​biosy​stems.​
2017.​12.​011
	 92.	 Murugan NJ, Kaltman DH, Jin PH, Chien M, Martinez R, 
Nguyen CQ, Kane A, Novak R, Ingber DE, Levin M (2021) 
Mechanosensation mediates long-range spatial decision-making 
in an aneural organism. Adv Mater 33(34):e2008161. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1002/​adma.​20200​8161
	 93.	 Boussard A, Delescluse J, Perez-Escudero A, Dussutour A 
(2019) Memory inception and preservation in slime moulds: the 
quest for a common mechanism. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol 
Sci 374(1774):20180368. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rstb.​2018.​0368
	 94.	 Boisseau RP, Vogel D, Dussutour A (2016) Habituation in nonneural organisms: evidence from slime moulds. Proc Biol Sci 
283(1829):20160446. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rspb.​2016.​0446
	 95.	 Iwayama K, Zhu L, Hirata Y, Aono M, Hara M, Aihara K (2016) 
Decision-making ability of Physarum polycephalum enhanced by 
its coordinated spatiotemporal oscillatory dynamics. Bioinspir 
Biomim 11(3):036001. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1088/​1748-​3190/​11/3/​
	 96.	 Kriegman S, Cheney N, Bongard J (2018) How morphological 
development can guide evolution. Sci Rep 8(1):13934. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41598-​018-​31868-7
	 97.	 Strandburg-Peshkin A, Farine DR, Couzin ID, Crofoot MC 
(2015) Group decisions. Shared decision-making drives collective movement in wild baboons. Science 348(6241):1358–1361. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​scien​ce.​aaa50​99
	 98.	 Couzin ID (2009) Collective cognition in animal groups. Trends 
Cogn Sci 13(1):36–43. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​tics.​2008.​10.​002
	 99.	 Rosenblueth A, Wiener N, Bigelow J (1943) Behavior, purpose, 
and teleology. Philos Sci 10:18–24
	100.	 Engel D, Malone TW (2018) Integrated information as a metric 
for group interaction. PLoS ONE 13(10):e0205335. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​02053​35
	101.	 Solé R, Amor DR, Duran-Nebreda S, Conde-Pueyo N, CarbonellBallestero M, Montañez R (2016) Synthetic collective intelligence. Biosystems 148:47–61. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​biosy​
stems.​2016.​01.​002
	102.	 Krakauer D, Bertschinger N, Olbrich E, Flack JC, Ay N 
(2020) The information theory of individuality. Theory Biosci 
139(2):209–223. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s12064-​020-​00313-7
	103.	 Flack JC (2017) Coarse-graining as a downward causation mechanism. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci 375(2109):20160338. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rsta.​2016.​0338
	104.	 Daniels BC, Ellison CJ, Krakauer DC, Flack JC (2016) Quantifying collectivity. Curr Opin Neurobiol 37:106–113. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​conb.​2016.​01.​012
	105.	 Pio-Lopez L, Kuchling F, Tung A, Pezzulo G, Levin M (2022) 
Active inference, morphogenesis, and computational psychiatry. Front Comput Neurosci 16:988977. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​
fncom.​2022.​988977
	106.	 Pezzulo G, LaPalme J, Durant F (1821) Levin M (2021) Bistability of somatic pattern memories: stochastic outcomes in bioelectric circuits underlying regeneration. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 
Biol Sci 376:20190765. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rstb.​2019.​0765
	107.	 Levin M (2021) Bioelectric signaling: Reprogrammable circuits underlying embryogenesis, regeneration, and cancer. Cell 
184(8):1971–1989. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cell.​2021.​02.​034
	108.	 Levin M (2021) Bioelectrical approaches to cancer as a problem of the scaling of the cellular self. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 
165:102–113. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​pbiom​olbio.​2021.​04.​007

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 28 of 33
	109.	 Moore D, Walker SI, Levin M (2017) Cancer as a disorder of patterning information: computational and biophysical perspectives 
on the cancer problem. Converg Sci Phys Oncol. 3(4):043001. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1088/​2057-​1739/​aa8548
	110.	 Macia J, Vidiella B, Solé RV (2017) Synthetic associative 
learning in engineered multicellular consortia. J R Soc Interface 
14(129):20170158. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rsif.​2017.​0158
	111.	 Urrios A, Macia J, Manzoni R, Conde N, Bonforti A, de Nadal 
E, Posas F, Solé R (2016) A synthetic multicellular memory 
device. ACS Synth Biol 5(8):862–873. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1021/​
acssy​nbio.​5b002​52
	112.	 Solé R (2016) The major synthetic evolutionary transitions. 
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 371(1701):20160175. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rstb.​2016.​0175
	113.	 Solé R (2016) Synthetic transitions: towards a new synthesis. 
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 371(1701):20150438. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rstb.​2015.​0438
	114.	 Kriegman S, Walker S, Shah D, Levin M, Kramer-Bottiglio R, 
Bongard J (2019) Automated shapeshifting for function recovery in damaged robots. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science 
and Systems XV (Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany). pp. 28. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​15607/​RSS.​2019.​XV.​028
	115.	 Cheney N, Bongard JC, Lipson H (2015) Evolving Soft Robots 
in Tight Spaces. In: Proceedings of the 2015 Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (Madrid, Spain). Association for Computing Machinery: New York, NY. pp. 935–942. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​27394​80.​27546​62
	116.	 Auerbach JE, Bongard JC (2011) Evolving Complete Robots 
with CPPN-NEAT: The Utility of Recurrent Connections. 
Gecco-2011: Proceedings of the 13th Annual Genetic and 
Evolutionary Computation Conference: 1475–1482. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1145/​20015​76.​20017​75
	117.	 Lehman J, Clune J, Misevic D, Adami C, Altenberg L, Beaulieu J, Bentley PJ, Bernard S, Beslon G, Bryson DM, Cheney 
N, Chrabaszcz P, Cully A, Doncieux S, Dyer FC, Ellefsen KO, 
Feldt R, Fischer S, Forrest S, Frenoy A, Gagne C, Le Goff L, 
Grabowski LM, Hodjat B, Hutter F, Keller L, Knibbe C, Krcah 
P, Lenski RE, Lipson H, MacCurdy R, Maestre C, Miikkulainen R, Mitri S, Moriarty DE, Mouret JB, Nguyen A, Ofria 
C, Parizeau M, Parsons D, Pennock RT, Punch WF, Ray TS, 
Schoenauer M, Schulte E, Sims K, Stanley KO, Taddei F, Tarapore D, Thibault S, Watson R, Weimer W, Yosinski J (2020) 
The surprising creativity of digital evolution: a collection of 
anecdotes from the evolutionary computation and artificial life 
research communities. Artif Life 26(2):274–306. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1162/​artl_a_​00319
	118.	 Rieffel J, Knox D, Smith S, Trimmer B (2014) Growing and 
evolving soft robots. Artif Life 20(1):143–162. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1162/​ARTL_a_​00101
	119.	 Harvey I, Di Paolo E, Wood R, Quinn M, Tuci E (2005) Evolutionary robotics: a new scientific tool for studying cognition. 
Artif Life 11(1–2):79–98. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​10645​46053​
	120.	 Watson RA, Mills R, Buckley CL (2011) Global adaptation in 
networks of selfish components: emergent associative memory 
at the system scale. Artif Life 17(3):147–166. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1162/​artl_a_​00029
	121.	 Sridhar VH, Li L, Gorbonos D, Nagy M, Schell BR, Sorochkin T, Gov NS, Couzin ID (2021) The geometry of decisionmaking in individuals and collectives. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A 118(50):e2102157118. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​21021​
	122.	 Sun Y, Do H, Gao J, Zhao R, Zhao M, Mogilner A (2013) Keratocyte fragments and cells utilize competing pathways to move in 
opposite directions in an electric field. Curr Biol 23(7):569–574. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cub.​2013.​02.​026
	123.	 Kriegman S, Blackiston D, Levin M, Bongard J (2020) A scalable pipeline for designing reconfigurable organisms. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 117(4):1853–1859. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​
19108​37117
	124.	 Blackiston D, Lederer EK, Kriegman S, Garnier S, Bongard J, 
Levin M (2021) A cellular platform for the development of synthetic living machines. Sci Robot 6(52):eabf1571. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1126/​sciro​botics.​abf15​71
	125.	 Kriegman S, Blackiston D, Levin M, Bongard J (2021) Kinematic 
self-replication in reconfigurable organisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A 118(49):e2112672118. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​21126​
	126.	 Gumuskaya G, Srivastava P, Cooper BG, Lesser H, Semegran B, 
Garnier S, Levin M (2022) Motile living biobots self-construct 
from adult human somatic progenitor seed cells. bioRxiv. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2022.​08.​04.​502707
	127.	 Tseng A, Levin M (2013) Cracking the bioelectric code: probing 
endogenous ionic controls of pattern formation. Commun Integr 
Biol. 6(1):e22595. https://​doi.​org/​10.​4161/​cib.​22595
	128.	 Adams DS, Tseng AS, Levin M (2013) Light-activation of the 
Archaerhodopsin H(+)-pump reverses age-dependent loss of vertebrate regeneration: sparking system-level controls in vivo. Biol 
Open 2(3):306–313. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​bio.​20133​665
	129.	 Tseng AS, Beane WS, Lemire JM, Masi A, Levin M (2010) 
Induction of vertebrate regeneration by a transient sodium current. J Neurosci 30(39):13192–13200. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1523/​
JNEUR​OSCI.​3315-​10.​2010
	130.	 Sala M, Casacci LP, Balletto E, Bonelli S, Barbero F (2014) 
Variation in butterfly larval acoustics as a strategy to infiltrate 
and exploit host ant colony resources. PLoS ONE 9(4):e94341. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​00943​41
	131.	 Watson RA, Thies C (2019) Are Developmental Plasticity, Niche 
Construction, and Extended Inheritance Necessary for Evolution by Natural Selection? The Role of Active Phenotypes in the 
Minimal Criteria for Darwinian Individuality. In: T. U, Laland 
KN (eds), Evolutionary Causation: Biological and Philosophical 
Reflections. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA
	132.	 Constant A, Ramstead MJD, Veissiere SPL, Campbell JO, Friston KJ (2018) A variational approach to niche construction. J 
R Soc Interface 15(141):20170685. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rsif.​
2017.​0685
	133.	 Zhong R, Zhang F, Yang Z, Li Y, Xu Q, Lan H, Lang S, Cyganek 
L, Burgermeister E, El-Battrawy I, Zhou X, Akin I, Borggrefe 
M (2022) Regulation of ion channel function in human-induced 
pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes by cancer cell 
secretion through DNA methylation. Front Cardiovasc Med. 
9:839104. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fcvm.​2022.​839104
	134.	 Webster JP, McConkey GA (2010) Toxoplasma gondii-altered 
host behaviour: clues as to mechanism of action. Folia Parasitol 
57(2):95–104. https://​doi.​org/​10.​14411/​fp.​2010.​012
	135.	 Morales J, Ehret G, Poschmann G, Reinicke T, Maurya AK, 
Kroninger L, Zanini D, Wolters R, Kalyanaraman D, Krakovka 
M, Baumers M, Stuhler K, Nowack ECM (2023) Host-symbiont 
interactions in Angomonas deanei include the evolution of a 
host-derived dynamin ring around the endosymbiont division 
site. Curr Biol 33(1):28-40.e7. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cub.​
2022.​11.​020
	136.	 Loreto RG, Hughes DP (2019) The metabolic alteration and 
apparent preservation of the zombie ant brain. J Insect Physiol 
118:103918. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jinsp​hys.​2019.​103918
	137.	 Rule JS, Tenenbaum JB, Piantadosi ST (2020) The child as 
hacker. Trends Cogn Sci 24(11):900–915. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​tics.​2020.​07.​005
	138.	 Mani MS (1964) Ecology of plant galls. Springer, Dordrecht

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 29 of 33 
	139.	 Jackson TNW, Koludarov I (2020) How the toxin got its toxicity. 
Front Pharmacol 11:574925. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fphar.​2020.​
	140.	 Rahwan I, Cebrian M, Obradovich N, Bongard J, Bonnefon JF, 
Breazeal C, Crandall JW, Christakis NA, Couzin ID, Jackson 
MO, Jennings NR, Kamar E, Kloumann IM, Larochelle H, Lazer 
D, McElreath R, Mislove A, Parkes DC, Pentland A, Roberts 
ME, Shariff A, Tenenbaum JB, Wellman M (2019) Machine 
behaviour. Nature 568(7753):477–486. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
s41586-​019-​1138-y
	141.	 Gawne R, McKenna KZ, Levin M (2020) Competitive and coordinative interactions between body parts produce adaptive developmental outcomes. BioEssays 42(8):e1900245. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1002/​bies.​20190​0245
	142.	 Smiley P, Levin M (2022) Competition for finite resources 
as coordination mechanism for morphogenesis: an evolutionary algorithm study of digital embryogeny. Biosystems 
221:104762. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​biosy​stems.​2022.​104762
	143.	 Chong I, Proctor RW (2020) On the evolution of a radical concept: affordances according to gibson and their subsequent use 
and development. Perspect Psychol Sci 15(1):117–132. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1177/​17456​91619​868207
	144.	 Prindle A, Liu J, Asally M, Ly S, Garcia-Ojalvo J, Süel GM 
(2015) Ion channels enable electrical communication in bacterial 
communities. Nature 527(7576):59–63. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
natur​e15709
	145.	 Fields C, Bischof J, Levin M (2020) Morphological coordination: 
a common ancestral function unifying neural and non-neural 
signaling. Physiology 35(1):16–30. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1152/​physi​
ol.​00027.​2019
	146.	 Lobikin M, Lobo D, Blackiston DJ, Martyniuk CJ, Tkachenko 
E, Levin M (2015) Serotonergic regulation of melanocyte conversion: a bioelectrically regulated network for stochastic all-ornone hyperpigmentation. Sci Signal. 8(397):ra99. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1126/​scisi​gnal.​aac66​09
	147.	 Blackiston D, Adams DS, Lemire JM, Lobikin M, Levin M 
(2011) Transmembrane potential of GlyCl-expressing instructor cells induces a neoplastic-like conversion of melanocytes via 
a serotonergic pathway. Dis Model Mech 4(1):67–85. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1242/​dmm.​005561
	148.	 Morokuma J, Blackiston D, Adams DS, Seebohm G, Trimmer 
B, Levin M (2008) Modulation of potassium channel function 
confers a hyperproliferative invasive phenotype on embryonic 
stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105(43):16608–16613. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​08083​28105
	149.	 Lobo D, Lobikin M, Levin M (2017) Discovering novel phenotypes with automatically inferred dynamic models: a partial 
melanocyte conversion in Xenopus. Sci Rep 7:41339. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1038/​srep4​1339
	150.	 Vandenberg LN, Morrie RD, Adams DS (2011) V-ATPasedependent ectodermal voltage and pH regionalization are 
required for craniofacial morphogenesis. Dev Dyn 240(8):1889–
1904. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​dvdy.​22685
	151.	 Adams DS, Uzel SG, Akagi J, Wlodkowic D, Andreeva V, Yelick 
PC, Devitt-Lee A, Pare JF, Levin M (2016) Bioelectric signalling 
via potassium channels: a mechanism for craniofacial dysmorphogenesis in KCNJ2-associated Andersen-Tawil Syndrome. J 
Physiol 594(12):3245–3270. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1113/​JP271​930
	152.	 Pai VP, Aw S, Shomrat T, Lemire JM, Levin M (2012) Transmembrane voltage potential controls embryonic eye patterning 
in Xenopus laevis. Development 139(2):313–323. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1242/​dev.​073759
	153.	 Letendre K, Moses ME (2013) Synergy in Ant Foraging Strategies: Memory and Communication Alone and In Combination. 
In: Proceedings of the 2013 Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Association for 
Computing Machinery: New York, NY. pp. 41–48. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1145/​24633​72.​24633​89
	154.	 Planqué R, van den Berg JB, Franks NR (2010) Recruitment 
strategies and colony size in ants. PLoS ONE 5(8):e11664. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​00116​64
	155.	 Beane WS, Morokuma J, Adams DS, Levin M (2011) A chemical genetics approach reveals H, K-ATPase-mediated membrane 
voltage is required for planarian head regeneration. Chem Biol 
18(1):77–89. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chemb​iol.​2010.​11.​012
	156.	 Beane WS, Morokuma J, Lemire JM, Levin M (2013) Bioelectric 
signaling regulates head and organ size during planarian regeneration. Development 140(2):313–322. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​
dev.​086900
	157.	 Williams KB, Bischof J, Lee FJ, Miller KA, LaPalme JV, Wolfe 
BE, Levin M (2020) Regulation of axial and head patterning 
during planarian regeneration by a commensal bacterium. Mech 
Dev 163:103614. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​mod.​2020.​103614
	158.	 Tasaki KM (2013) Circular causality in integrative multi-scale 
systems biology and its interaction with traditional medicine. 
Prog Biophys Mol Biol 111(2–3):144–146. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​pbiom​olbio.​2012.​09.​005
	159.	 Noble D (2012) A theory of biological relativity: no privileged 
level of causation. Interface Focus 2(1):55–64. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1098/​rsfs.​2011.​0067
	160.	 Mathews J, Chang J, Devlin L, Levin M (2022) Cellular signaling 
pathways as plastic proto-cognitive systems implications for biomedicine. OSF Preprints. https://​doi.​org/​10.​31219/​osf.​io/​c6n9r
	161.	 Corning PA (2007) Control information theory: the ‘missing link’ 
in the science of cybernetics. Syst Res Behav Sci 24(3):297–311. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​sres.​808
	162.	 McShea DW (2012) Upper-directed systems: a new approach to 
teleology in biology. Biol Philos 27(5):663–684. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1007/​s10539-​012-​9326-2
	163.	 McShea DW (2016) Freedom and purpose in biology. Stud Hist 
Philos Biol Biomed Sci 58:64–72. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
shpsc.​2015.​12.​002
	164.	 McShea DW (2013) Machine wanting. Stud Hist Philos Biol 
Biomed Sci 44(4 Pt B):679–687. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​shpsc.​
2013.​05.​015
	165.	 Heylighen F (2022) The meaning and origin of goal-directedness: 
a dynamical systems perspective. Biol J Linn Soc. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1093/​bioli​nnean/​blac0​60
	166.	 Corning PA (2022) A systems theory of biological evolution. 
Biosystems 214: 104630. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​biosy​stems.​
2022.​104630
	167.	 Busseniers E, Veloz T, Heylighen F (2021) Goal directedness, 
chemical organizations, and cybernetic mechanisms. Entropy 
23(8):1039. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​e2308​1039
	168.	 Hoel EP (2018) Agent above, atom below: how agents causally 
emerge from their underlying microphysics. In: Aguirre A, Foster 
B, Merali Z (eds) Wandering towards a goal: how can mindless mathematical laws give rise to aims and intention? Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, pp 63–76
	169.	 Hoel E (2017) When the map is better than the territory. Entropy 
19(5):188. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​e1905​0188
	170.	 Albantakis L, Marshall W, Hoel E, Tononi G (2019) What caused 
what? A quantitative account of actual causation using dynamical causal networks. Entropy 21(5):459. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​
e2105​0459
	171.	 Hoel EP, Albantakis L, Marshall W, Tononi G (2016) Can the 
macro beat the micro? Integrated information across spatiotemporal scales. Neurosci Conscious. 2016(1):012. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1093/​nc/​niw012
	172.	 Hoel EP, Albantakis L, Tononi G (2013) Quantifying causal 
emergence shows that macro can beat micro. Proc Natl Acad 

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 30 of 33
Sci U S A 110(49):19790–19795. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​
13149​22110
	173.	 Lyon P (2019) Of what is “minimal cognition” the half-baked 
version? Adapt Behav 28(6):407–424. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​
10597​12319​871360
	174.	 Clawson WP, Levin M (2022) Endless forms most beautiful 2.0: 
teleonomy and the bioengineering of chimaeric and synthetic 
organisms. Biol J Linn Soc. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​bioli​nnean/​
blac0​73
	175.	 Harris AK (2018) The need for a concept of shape homeostasis. 
Biosystems 173:65–72. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​biosy​stems.​
2018.​09.​012
	176.	 Blackiston DJ, Levin M (2013) Ectopic eyes outside the head in 
Xenopus tadpoles provide sensory data for light-mediated learning. J Exp Biol 216(Pt 6):1031–1040. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​jeb.​
	177.	 Farinella-Ferruzza N (1956) The transformation of a tail into 
limb after xenoplastic transplantation. Experientia 12(8):304–
305. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​bf021​59624
	178.	 Vandenberg LN, Adams DS, Levin M (2012) Normalized shape 
and location of perturbed craniofacial structures in the Xenopus 
tadpole reveal an innate ability to achieve correct morphology. 
Dev Dyn 241(5):863–878. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​dvdy.​23770
	179.	 Slijper EJ (1942) Biologic anatomical investigations on the 
bipedal gait and upright posture in mammals—with special reference to a little goat born without forelegs II. Proc K Ned Akad 
Wet 45(1/5):407–415
	180.	 Little GE, Lopez-Bendito G, Runker AE, Garcia N, Pinon MC, 
Chedotal A, Molnar Z, Mitchell KJ (2009) Specificity and plasticity of thalamocortical connections in Sema6A mutant mice. 
PLoS Biol 7(4):e98. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pbio.​10000​
	181.	 Fankhauser G (1945) The effects of changes in chromosome 
number on amphibian development. Q Rev Biol 20(1):20–78. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1086/​394703
	182.	 Harris WA, Hartenstein V (1991) Neuronal determination without cell division in Xenopus embryos. Neuron 6(4):499–515. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0896-​6273(91)​90053-3
	183.	 Zhang L, Kendrick C, Julich D, Holley SA (2008) Cell cycle progression is required for zebrafish somite morphogenesis but not 
segmentation clock function. Development 135(12):2065–2070. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​dev.​022673
	184.	 Fankhauser G (1945) Maintenance of normal structure in heteroploid salamander larvae, through compensation of changes in 
cell size by adjustment of cell number and cell shape. J Exp Zool 
100(3):445–455. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​jez.​14010​00310
	185.	 Ackley D, Littman M (1990) Interactions between learning and 
evolution. In: Proceedings of artificial life II (Santa Fe, NM). 
Wiley, Boston, pp 487–509
	186.	 Levin M (2020) Revisiting Burr and Northrop’s “The ElectroDynamic Theory of Life” (1935). Biol Theory 15(2):83–90. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s13752-​020-​00341-y
	187.	 Burr HS, Northrop FSC (1935) The electro-dynamic theory of 
life. Q Rev Biol 10(3):322–333
	188.	 Levin M, Martyniuk CJ (2018) The bioelectric code: an ancient 
computational medium for dynamic control of growth and form. 
Biosystems 164:76–93. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​biosy​stems.​
2017.​08.​009
	189.	 Hansen TF (2003) Is modularity necessary for evolvability? 
Remarks on the relationship between pleiotropy and evolvability. Biosystems 69(2–3):83–94. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​s0303-​
2647(02)​00132-6
	190.	 Adams DS, Masi A, Levin M (2007) H+ pump-dependent 
changes in membrane voltage are an early mechanism necessary 
and sufficient to induce Xenopus tail regeneration. Development 
134(7):1323–1335. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​dev.​02812
	191.	 Nieto-Torres JL, Verdiá-Báguena C, Castaño-Rodriguez C, 
Aguilella VM, Enjuanes L (2015) Relevance of viroporin ion 
channel activity on viral replication and pathogenesis. Viruses 
7(7):3552–3573. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​v7072​786
	192.	 Moorthy NS, Poongavanam V, Pratheepa V (2014) Viral M2 
ion channel protein: a promising target for anti-influenza drug 
discovery. Mini Rev Med Chem 14(10):819–830. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​2174/​13895​57514​10141​02015​0822
	193.	 Durant F, Morokuma J, Fields C, Williams K, Adams DS, Levin 
M (2017) Long-term, stochastic editing of regenerative anatomy via targeting endogenous bioelectric gradients. Biophys J 
112(10):2231–2243. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​bpj.​2017.​04.​011
	194.	 Durant F, Bischof J, Fields C, Morokuma J, LaPalme J, Hoi 
A, Levin M (2019) The role of early bioelectric signals in the 
regeneration of planarian anterior/posterior polarity. Biophys J 
116(5):948–961. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​bpj.​2019.​01.​029
	195.	 Oviedo NJ, Morokuma J, Walentek P, Kema IP, Gu MB, Ahn 
JM, Hwang JS, Gojobori T, Levin M (2010) Long-range neural 
and gap junction protein-mediated cues control polarity during 
planarian regeneration. Dev Biol 339(1):188–199. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1016/j.​ydbio.​2009.​12.​012
	196.	 Baldwin JM (1896) A new factor in evolution. Am Nat 
30:441–445
	197.	 Sullivan KG, Emmons-Bell M, Levin M (2016) Physiological 
inputs regulate species-specific anatomy during embryogenesis 
and regeneration. Commun Integr Biol. 9(4):e1192733. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1080/​19420​889.​2016.​11927​33
	198.	 Emmons-Bell M, Durant F, Hammelman J, Bessonov N, Volpert 
V, Morokuma J, Pinet K, Adams DS, Pietak A, Lobo D, Levin M 
(2015) Gap junctional blockade stochastically induces different 
species-specific head anatomies in genetically wild-type girardia 
dorotocephala flatworms. Int J Mol Sci 16(11):27865–27896. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ijms1​61126​065
	199.	 Waddington CH (1959) Canalization of development and genetic 
assimilation of acquired characters. Nature 183(4676):1654–
1655. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​18316​54a0
	200.	 Lahoz-Beltra R, Hameroff SR, Dayhoff JE (1993) Cytoskeletal 
logic: a model for molecular computation via Boolean operations 
in microtubules and microtubule-associated proteins. Biosystems 
29(1):1–23. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0303-​2647(93)​90078-q
	201.	 Rasmussen S, Karampurwala H, Vaidyanath R, Jensen KS, Hameroff S (1990) Computational connectionism within neurons: a 
model of cytoskeletal automata subserving neural networks. 
Physica D 42(1–3):428–449. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0167-​
2789(90)​90093-5
	202.	 Craddock TJ, Tuszynski JA, Hameroff S (2012) Cytoskeletal 
signaling: is memory encoded in microtubule lattices by CaMKII 
phosphorylation? PLoS Comput Biol 8(3):e1002421. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pcbi.​10024​21
	203.	 Beisson J (2008) Preformed cell structure and cell heredity. Prion 
2(1):1–8. https://​doi.​org/​10.​4161/​pri.2.​1.​5063
	204.	 Strzyżewska-Jówko I, Jerka-Dziadosz M, Frankel J (2003) Effect 
of alteration in the global body plan on the deployment of morphogenesis-related protein epitopes labeled by the monoclonal 
antibody 12G9 in Tetrahymena thermophila. Protist 154(1):71–
90. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1078/​14344​61037​64928​503
	205.	 Nelsen EM, Frankel J, Jenkins LM (1989) Non-genic inheritance 
of cellular handedness. Development 105(3):447–456. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1242/​dev.​105.3.​447
	206.	 Fields C, Levin M (2018) Multiscale memory and bioelectric 
error correction in the cytoplasm-cytoskeleton-membrane system. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med. 10(2):e1410. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1002/​wsbm.​1410
	207.	 Katz Y, Fontana W (2022) Probabilistic inference with polymerizing biochemical circuits. Entropy 24(5):629. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
3390/​e2405​0629

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 31 of 33 
	208.	 Katz Y, Springer M, Fontana W (2018) Embodying probabilistic 
inference in biochemical circuits. arXiv. arXiv:​1806.​10161​v1. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​1806.​10161. Accessed 10 April 
	209.	 Katz Y, Springer M (2016) Probabilistic adaptation in changing 
microbial environments. PeerJ 4:e2716. https://​doi.​org/​10.​7717/​
peerj.​2716
	210.	 McGregor S, Vasas V, Husbands P, Fernando C (2012) Evolution 
of associative learning in chemical networks. PLoS Comput Biol 
8(11):e1002739. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pcbi.​10027​39
	211.	 Fernando C, Vasas V, Szathmáry E, Husbands P (2011) Evolvable neuronal paths: a novel basis for information and search in 
the brain. PLoS ONE 6(8):e23534. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​
al.​pone.​00235​34
	212.	 Prohaska SJ, Stadler PF, Krakauer DC (2010) Innovation in gene 
regulation: the case of chromatin computation. J Theor Biol 
265(1):27–44. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jtbi.​2010.​03.​011
	213.	 Bryant B (2012) Chromatin computation. PLoS ONE 
7(5):e35703. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​00357​03
	214.	 Hauser H, Ijspeert AJ, Füchslin RM, Pfeifer R, Maass W (2012) 
Towards a theoretical foundation for morphological computation with compliant bodies. Biol Cybern 105(5–6):355–370. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00422-​012-​0471-0
	215.	 Pfeifer R (2006) Morphological computation: connecting brain, 
body, and environment. In: Ijspeert AJ, Masuzawa T, Kusumoto S (eds) Biologically inspired approaches to advanced 
information technology. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 2–3
	216.	 Cheney N, Clune J, Lipson H (2014) Evolved electrophysiological soft robots. ALIFE 14:222–229. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1162/​978-0-​262-​32621-6-​ch037
	217.	 Walker K, Hauser H (2021) Evolution of morphology through 
sculpting in a voxel based robot. In: Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems (ALIFE XV) (Prague, Czech Republic). 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. pp. 27. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​
isal_a_​00418
	218.	 Corucci F, Cheney N, Lipson H, Laschi C, Bongard JC (2015) 
Material properties affect evolution’s ability to exploit morphological computation in growing soft-bodied creatures. In: Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems (ALIFE XV) (Cancun, 
Mexico). MIT Press: Cambridge, MA. pp. 234–241. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1162/​978-0-​262-​33936-0-​ch043
	219.	 Pfeifer R, Iida F, Bongard J (2005) New robotics: design principles for intelligent systems. Artif Life 11(1–2):99–120. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1162/​10645​46053​279017
	220.	 Newman SA (2022) Form, Function, Agency: Sources of Natural 
Purpose in Animal Evolution. In: Corning PA, Kauffman SA, 
Noble D, Shapiro J, Vane-Wright R (eds), Evolution ‘on Purpose’: Teleonomy in Living Systems MIT Press: Cambridge, 
MA. pp. 199–220
	221.	 Moczek AP (2022) When the end modifies its means: the origins of novelty and the evolution of innovation. Biol J Linn Soc. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​bioli​nnean/​blac0​61
	222.	 Cooke J (1981) Scale of body pattern adjusts to available cell 
number in amphibian embryos. Nature 290(5809):775–778. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​29077​5a0
	223.	 Cooke J (1979) Cell number in relation to primary pattern formation in the embryo of Xenopus laevis. I: The cell cycle during new pattern formation in response to implanted organisers. J 
Embryol Exp Morphol 51:165–182. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​dev.​
51.1.​165
	224.	 McDowell G, Rajadurai S, Levin M (2016) From cytoskeletal 
dynamics to organ asymmetry: a nonlinear, regulative pathway 
underlies left-right patterning. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol 
Sci 371(1710):20150409. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rstb.​2015.​0409
	225.	 Žliobaitė I, Stenseth NC (2016) Improving adaptation through 
evolution and learning: a response to Watson and Szathmáry. 
Trends Ecol Evol 31(12):892–893. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​tree.​
2016.​10.​007
	226.	 Kanaan AF, Piedade AP (2022) Electro-responsive polymerbased platforms for electrostimulation of cells. Mater Adv 
3(5):2337–2353. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1039/​d1ma0​1012c
	227.	 Hamood AW, Marder E (2014) Animal-to-animal variability in 
neuromodulation and circuit function. Cold Spring Harb Symp 
Quant Biol 79:21–28. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​sqb.​2014.​79.​
	228.	 Shull PB, Damian DD (2015) Haptic wearables as sensory 
replacement, sensory augmentation and trainer - a review. J Neuroeng Rehabil 12:59. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12984-​015-​0055-z
	229.	 Sampaio E, Maris S, Bach-y-Rita P (2001) Brain plasticity: 
“visual” acuity of blind persons via the tongue. Brain Res 
908(2):204–207. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​s0006-​8993(01)​02667-1
	230.	 Lebedev MA, Nicolelis MA (2011) Toward a whole-body neuroprosthetic. Prog Brain Res 194:47–60. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​
B978-0-​444-​53815-4.​00018-2
	231.	 Friston KJ, Daunizeau J, Kilner J, Kiebel SJ (2010) Action and 
behavior: a free-energy formulation. Biol Cybern 102(3):227–
260. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00422-​010-​0364-z
	232.	 Friston K (2013) Life as we know it. J R Soc Interface 
10(86):20130475. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rsif.​2013.​0475
	233.	 Friston K, Levin M, Sengupta B, Pezzulo G (2015) Knowing 
one’s place: a free-energy approach to pattern regulation. J R Soc 
Interface 12(105):20141383. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rsif.​2014.​
	234.	 Tang Y, Ha D (2021) The Sensory Neuron as a Transformer: Permutation-Invariant Neural Networks for Reinforcement Learning. arXiv. arXiv:​2109.​02869​v2. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​
2109.​02869. Accessed 10 April 2023
	235.	 Kirchhoff M, Parr T, Palacios E, Friston K, Kiverstein J (2018) 
The Markov blankets of life: autonomy, active inference and 
the free energy principle. J R Soc Interface 15(138):20170792. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rsif.​2017.​0792
	236.	 Allen M, Friston KJ (2018) From cognitivism to autopoiesis: towards a computational framework for the embodied 
mind. Synthese 195(6):2459–2482. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s11229-​016-​1288-5
	237.	 Chernet B, Levin M (2013) Endogenous voltage potentials and 
the microenvironment: bioelectric signals that reveal, induce and 
normalize cancer. J Clin Exp Oncol Suppl 1:S1-002. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​4172/​2324-​9110.​S1-​002
	238.	 Oviedo NJ, Beane WS (2009) Regeneration: the origin of cancer 
or a possible cure? Semin Cell Dev Biol 20(5):557–564. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​semcdb.​2009.​04.​005
	239.	 Levin M, Pietak AM, Bischof J (2019) Planarian regeneration 
as a model of anatomical homeostasis: recent progress in biophysical and computational approaches. Semin Cell Dev Biol 
87:125–144. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​semcdb.​2018.​04.​003
	240.	 Shreesha L, Levin M (2023) Cellular competency during development alters evolutionary dynamics in an artificial embryogeny 
model. Entropy 25(1):131. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​e2501​0131
	241.	 McShea DW (2002) A complexity drain on cells in the evolution 
of multicellularity. Evolution 56(3):441–452. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1111/j.​0014-​3820.​2002.​tb013​57.x
	242.	 Wagner GP, Altenberg L (1996) Perspective: complex adaptations and the evolution of evolvability. Evolution 50(3):967–976. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1558-​5646.​1996.​tb023​39.x
	243.	 Needham J (1933) On the dissociability of the fundamental 
processes in ontogenesis. Biol Rev Biol P Camb. 8(2):180–223. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1469-​185X.​1933.​tb011​53.x

	
M. Levin 
1 3
Page 32 of 33
	244.	 Raff RA, Kaufman TC (1991) Embryos, genes and evolution: 
the developmental-genetic basis of evolutionary change. Indiana 
University Press, Bloomington
	245.	 Gould SJ (1977) Ontogeny and phylogeny. Belknap Press, An 
Imprint of Harvard University Press, Cambridge
	246.	 Paaby AB, Gibson G (2016) Cryptic genetic variation in evolutionary developmental genetics. Biology 5(2):28. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​3390/​biolo​gy502​0028
	247.	 Manicka S, Johnson K, Levin M, Murrugarra D (2023) The nonlinearity of regulation in biological networks. NPJ Syst Biol Appl 
9(1):10. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41540-​023-​00273-w
	248.	 Boyle EA, Li YI, Pritchard JK (2017) An expanded view of complex traits: from polygenic to omnigenic. Cell 169(7):1177–1186. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cell.​2017.​05.​038
	249.	 Budnikova M, Habig JW, Lobo D, Cornia N, Levin M, Andersen 
T (2014) Design of a flexible component gathering algorithm for 
converting cell-based models to graph representations for use in 
evolutionary search. BMC Bioinform 15:178. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1186/​1471-​2105-​15-​178
	250.	 Krakauer D (2015) Cryptographic Nature. arXiv. arXiv:​
1505.​01744​v1. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​1505.​01744. 
Accessed 10 April 2023
	251.	 Witkowski O, Ikegami T (2019) How to make swarms openended? Evolving collective intelligence through a constricted 
exploration of adjacent possibles. Artif Life 25(2):178–197. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​artl_a_​00288
	252.	 Matsushita Y, Kaneko K (2020) Homeorhesis in Waddington’s landscape by epigenetic feedback regulation. Phy Rev 
Res. 2(2):023083. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1103/​PhysR​evRes​earch.2.​
	253.	 Müller GB, Newman SA (1999) Generation, integration, automony: three steps in the evolution of homology. In: Bock GK, 
Cardew G (eds) Novartis found symposium on homology. John 
Wiley & Sons, Chichester, pp 65–79
	254.	 Turing AM (1950) Computing machinery and intelligence. Mind 
59(236):433–460
	255.	 Turing AM (1952) The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Philos 
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 237(641):37–72. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1098/​rstb.​1952.​0012
	256.	 Lutz H (1949) Sur la production experimentale de la polyembryonie et de la monstruosite double chez les oiseaux. Arch Anat 
Microsc Morphol Exp 38:79–144
	257.	 Keim NC, Paulsen JD, Zeravcic Z, Sastry S, Nagel SR (2019) 
Memory formation in matter. Rev Mod Phys 91(3):035002. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1103/​RevMo​dPhys.​91.​035002
	258.	 Silva-Dias L, Lopez-Castillo A (2022) Morphogenesis in synthetic chemical cells. J Phys Chem Lett 13(1):296–301. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1021/​acs.​jpcle​tt.​1c035​73
	259.	 Meredith CH, Moerman PG, Groenewold J, Chiu YJ, Kegel 
WK, van Blaaderen A, Zarzar LD (2020) Predator-prey interactions between droplets driven by non-reciprocal oil exchange. 
Nat Chem 12(12):1136–1142. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
s41557-​020-​00575-0
	260.	 Hanczyc MM, Caschera F, Rasmussen S (2011) Models of minimal physical intelligence. Procedia Computer Science 7:275–
277. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​procs.​2011.​09.​058
	261.	 Kriegman S, Nasab AM, Shah D, Steele H, Branin G, Levin 
M, Bongard J, Kramer-Bottiglio R (2020) Scalable sim-to-real 
transfer of soft robot designs. In: Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE 
International Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft 2020) 
(New Haven, CT). IEEE: New York, NY. pp. 359–366. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1109/​RoboS​oft48​309.​2020.​91160​04
	262.	 Vandesompele A, Urbain G, Mahmud H, Wyffels F, Dambre 
J (2019) Body randomization reduces the sim-to-real gap for 
compliant quadruped locomotion. Front Neurorobot 13:9. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fnbot.​2019.​00009
	263.	 Csermely P, Kunsic N, Mendik P, Kerestély M, Faragó T, Veres 
DV, Tompa P (2020) Learning of signaling networks: molecular 
mechanisms. Trends Biochem Sci 45(4):284–294. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1016/j.​tibs.​2019.​12.​005
	264.	 Szilágyi A, Szabó P, Santos M, Szathmáry E (2020) Phenotypes 
to remember: evolutionary developmental memory capacity and 
robustness. PLoS Comput Biol 16(11):e1008425. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1371/​journ​al.​pcbi.​10084​25
	265.	 Bédécarrats A, Chen S, Pearce K, Cai D, Glanzman DL (2018) 
RNA from trained aplysia can induce an epigenetic engram for 
long-term sensitization in untrained aplysia. eNeuro. 5(3):e003818.2018. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1523/​ENEURO.​0038-​18.​2018
	266.	 Queenan BN, Ryan TJ, Gazzaniga MS, Gallistel CR (2017) On 
the research of time past: the hunt for the substrate of memory. 
Ann N Y Acad Sci 1396(1):108–125. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​
nyas.​13348
	267.	 McConnell JV (1967) The modern search for the engram. In: 
McConnell JV (ed) A manual of psychological experimentation 
on planarians, 2nd ed. Journal of Biological Psychology: Ann 
Arbour. pp. 1–9
	268.	 Hepper PG, Waldman B (1992) Embryonic olfactory learning 
in frogs. Q J Exp Psychol B 44(3–4):179–197. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1080/​02724​99920​82506​11
	269.	 Fernando CT, Liekens AM, Bingle LE, Beck C, Lenser T, 
Stekel DJ, Rowe JE (2009) Molecular circuits for associative learning in single-celled organisms. J R Soc Interface 
6(34):463–469. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rsif.​2008.​0344
	270.	 Manicka S, Levin M (2019) The Cognitive Lens: a primer on 
conceptual tools for analysing information processing in developmental and regenerative morphogenesis. Philos Trans R Soc 
Lond B Biol Sci 374(1774):20180369. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​
rstb.​2018.​0369
	271.	 Wagner A (2014) Arrival of the fittest: solving evolution’s 
greatest puzzle. Current, New York
	272.	 Wagner A, Rosen W (2014) Spaces of the possible: universal 
Darwinism and the wall between technological and biological 
innovation. J R Soc Interface 11(97):20131190. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1098/​rsif.​2013.​1190
	273.	 Maynard Smith J, Szathmáry E (1995) The major transitions 
in evolution. Oxford University Press, Oxford, New York
	274.	 Szathmáry E (2015) Toward major evolutionary transitions 
theory 2.0. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112(33):10104–10111. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​14213​98112
	275.	 Dewan EM (1976) Consciousness as an emergent causal agent 
in the context of control system theory. In: Globus G, Maxwell G, Savodnik I (eds) Consciousness and the brain: a scientific and philosophical inquiry. Plenum Press, New York, pp 
181–198
	276.	 Kriegman S, Nasab AMA, Blackiston D, Steele H, Levin M, 
Kramer-Bottiglio R, Bongard J (2021) Scale invariant robot 
behavior with fractals. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science 
and Systems (RSS 2021) (held virtually). https://​doi.​org/​10.​
15607/​RSS.​2021.​XVII.​059
	277.	 Karve S, Wagner A (2022) Multiple novel traits without immediate benefits originate in bacteria evolving on single antibiotics. Mol Biol Evol 39(1):msab341. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​
molbev/​msab3​41
	278.	 Raman K, Wagner A (2011) The evolvability of programmable 
hardware. J R Soc Interface 8(55):269–281. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1098/​rsif.​2010.​0212
	279.	 Wagner A (2011) The molecular origins of evolutionary innovations. Trends Genet 27(10):397–410. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​tig.​2011.​06.​002
	280.	 Beloussov LV, Grabovsky VI (2007) Information about a form 
(on the dynamic laws of morphogenesis). Biosystems 87(2–
3):204–214. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​biosy​stems.​2006.​09.​015

Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale competency in…
1 3
Page 33 of 33 
	281.	 Shmulevich I, Kauffman SA (2004) Activities and sensitivities in boolean network models. Phys Rev Lett 93(4):048701. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1103/​PhysR​evLett.​93.​048701
	282.	 Newman SA (2017) Inherency. In: de la Nuno Rosa L, Müller G (eds) Evolutionary developmental biology: a reference 
guide. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 1–12
	283.	 Ramstead MJD, Constant A, Badcock PB, Friston KJ (2019) 
Variational ecology and the physics of sentient systems. Phys 
Life Rev 31:188–205. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​plrev.​2018.​12.​
	284.	 Badcock PB, Friston KJ, Ramstead MJD, Ploeger A, Hohwy J 
(2019) The hierarchically mechanistic mind: an evolutionary 
systems theory of the human brain, cognition, and behavior. 
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 19(6):1319–1351. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​3758/​s13415-​019-​00721-3
	285.	 Luo X, Song R, Moreno DF, Ryu HY, Hochstrasser M, Acar 
M (2020) Epigenetic mechanisms contribute to evolutionary 
adaptation of gene network activity under environmental selection. Cell Rep 33(4):108306. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​celrep.​
2020.​108306
	286.	 Torday JS, Miller WB (2016) Phenotype as agent for epigenetic 
inheritance. Biology 5(3):30. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​biolo​gy503​
	287.	 Frank SA (2019) Evolutionary design of regulatory control. II. 
Robust error-correcting feedback increases genetic and phenotypic variability. J Theor Biol 468:72–81. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​jtbi.​2019.​02.​012
	288.	 Chen BS, Hsu CY, Liou JJ (2011) Robust design of biological 
circuits: evolutionary systems biology approach. J Biomed Biotechnol 2011:304236. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1155/​2011/​304236
	289.	 Miettinen K (1999) Evolutionary algorithms in engineering and 
computer science : recent advances in genetic algorithms, evolution strategies, evolutionary programming, genetic programming, 
and industrial applications. Wiley, Chichester, New York
	290.	 Fields C, Levin M (2020) Does evolution have a target morphology ? Organisms. J Biol Sci 4(1):57–76. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
13133/​2532-​5876/​16961
	291.	 Livnat A, Papadimitriou C (2016) Evolution and learning: used 
together, fused together. A response to Watson and Szathmáry. 
Trends Ecol Evol 31(12):894–896. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​tree.​
2016.​10.​004
	292.	 Friston KJ, Wiese W, Hobson JA (2020) Sentience and the origins of consciousness: from cartesian duality to Markovian Monism. Entropy 22(5):516. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​e2205​0516
	293.	 Levin M, Dennett DC, Cognition all the way down. Aeon Essays. 
2020.
	294.	 Calvo P, Baluška F (2015) Conditions for minimal intelligence 
across eukaryota: a cognitive science perspective. Front Psychol 
6:1329. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fpsyg.​2015.​01329
	295.	 Cervera J, Manzanares JA, Mafe S, Levin M (2019) Synchronization of bioelectric oscillations in networks of nonexcitable 
cells: from single-cell to multicellular states. J Phys Chem B 
123(18):3924–3934. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1021/​acs.​jpcb.​9b017​17
	296.	 Gardner M (1970) Mathematical games: the fantastic combinations of John Conway’s new solitaire game “life.” Sci Am 
223:120–123. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​scien​tific​ameri​can10​
70-​120
	297.	 Pickover CA (1990) Computers, pattern, chaos, and beauty: 
graphics from an unseen world. St. Martin’s Press, New York
	298.	 Gare A (2017) Chreods, homeorhesis and biofields: finding the 
right path for science through Daoism. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 
131:61–91. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​pbiom​olbio.​2017.​08.​010
	299.	 Palacios-Prado N, Bukauskas FF (2009) Heterotypic gap junction 
channels as voltage-sensitive valves for intercellular signaling. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106(35):14855–14860. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1073/​pnas.​09019​23106
	300.	 Rea AC, Vandenberg LN, Ball RE, Snouffer AA, Hudson AG, 
Zhu Y, McLain DE, Johnston LL, Lauderdale JD, Levin M, Dore 
TM (2013) Light-activated serotonin for exploring its action in 
biological systems. Chem Biol 20(12):1536–1546. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​chemb​iol.​2013.​11.​005
	301.	 Levin M, Buznikov GA, Lauder JM (2006) Of minds and 
embryos: left-right asymmetry and the serotonergic controls of 
pre-neural morphogenesis. Dev Neurosci 28(3):171–185. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1159/​00009​1915
	302.	 Levin M (2014) Endogenous bioelectrical networks store nongenetic patterning information during development and regeneration. J Physiol 592(11):2295–2305. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1113/​jphys​
iol.​2014.​271940
	303.	 Mathews J, Levin M (2018) The body electric 2.0: recent 
advances in developmental bioelectricity for regenerative and 
synthetic bioengineering. Curr Opin Biotechnol 52:134–144. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​copbio.​2018.​03.​008
	304.	 Yates FE (1994) Order and complexity in dynamical systems: 
homeodynamics as a generalized mechanics for biology. Math 
Comput Model 19(6–8):49–74. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0895-​
7177(94)​90189-9
	305.	 Manicka S, Pai VP, Levin M (2023) Information integration during bioelectric regulation of morphogenesis in the embryonic 
frog brain. bioRxiv. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2023.​01.​08.​523164
	306.	 Manicka S, Levin M (2022) Minimal developmental computation: a causal network approach to understand morphogenetic 
pattern formation. Entropy 24(1):107. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​
e2401​0107
	307.	 Manicka S, Levin M (2019) Modeling somatic computation with 
non-neural bioelectric networks. Sci Rep 9(1):18612. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1038/​s41598-​019-​54859-8
	308.	 Riol A, Cervera J, Levin M, Mafe S (2021) Cell systems bioelectricity: how different intercellular gap junctions could regionalize 
a multicellular aggregate. Cancers 13(21):5300. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​3390/​cance​rs132​15300
	309.	 Cervera J, Levin M, Mafe S (2020) Bioelectrical coupling of 
single-cell states in multicellular systems. J Phys Chem Lett 
11(9):3234–3241. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1021/​acs.​jpcle​tt.​0c006​41
	310.	 Cervera J, Pai VP, Levin M, Mafe S (2019) From non-excitable 
single-cell to multicellular bioelectrical states supported by ion 
channels and gap junction proteins: electrical potentials as distributed controllers. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 149:39–53. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​pbiom​olbio.​2019.​06.​004
	311.	 Chernet BT, Levin M (2013) Transmembrane voltage potential 
is an essential cellular parameter for the detection and control 
of tumor development in a Xenopus model. Dis Model Mech 
6(3):595–607. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1242/​dmm.​010835
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
