---
type: paper
source: 1-s2.0-S0006291X2400932X-main.pdf
format: pdf
processed: true
---

# Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
Available online 14 July 2024
0006-291X/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
[[Stress Sharing]] as cognitive glue for collective intelligences: A computational
model of [[Dukkha]] as a coordinator for [[Morphogenesis]]
[[Lakshwin Shreesha]] b, [[Michael Levin]] a,b,c,*
a [[Department Of Biology, Tufts University]], Medford, MA, 02155, USA
b [[Allen Discovery Center At Tufts University]], Medford, MA, 02155, USA
c [[Wyss Institute For Biologically Inspired Engineering]], Harvard University, Boston, MA, 02115, USA
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Swarm [[Intelligence]]
Cells
Embryos
Development
Morphogenesis
Stress
A B S T R A C T
[[Individuality]] cells have numerous competencies in physiological and metabolic spaces. However, multicellular
collectives can reliably navigate [[Anatomical Morphospace]] towards much larger, reliable endpoints. Understanding the robustness and control properties of this process is critical for [[Evo-Devo]],
bioengineering, and [[Regenerative Medicine]]. One mechanism that has been proposed for enabling individual cells
to coordinate toward specific morphological outcomes is the sharing of stress (where stress is a physiological
parameter that reflects the current amount of error in the context of a homeostatic loop). Here, we construct and
analyze a multiscale [[Agent-Based Model Of Morphogenesis]] in which we quantitatively examine the impact of
stress sharing on the ability to reach [[Homeostatic Setpoint]]. We found that stress sharing improves the morphogenetic efficiency of multicellular collectives; populations with stress sharing reached anatomical targets faster.
Moreover, stress sharing influenced the future fate of distant cells in the multi-cellular collective, enhancing cells’
movement and their radius of influence, consistent with the hypothesis that stress sharing works to increase
cohesiveness of collectives. During development, anatomical goal states could not be inferred from observation
of stress states, revealing the limitations of knowledge of goals by an extern observer outside the system itself.
Taken together, our analyses support an important role for stress sharing in natural and engineered systems that
seek robust large-scale behaviors to emerge from the activity of their competent components.
1. Introduction
Morphogenesis, broadly considered, is the ability of groups of cells to
build complex, functional anatomical structures. Large-scale manifestations of this process occur during embryonic development, [[Regeneration]], and [[Metamorphosis]]; smaller-scale, but equally important, is the ongoing maintenance of order that can resist aging, degradation, and
[[Cancer]] over decades [1–4]. It’s a remarkable process in which large
numbers of cells cooperate to reliably build, and remodel toward an
invariant target morphology.
A key aspect of morphogenesis is that it is not an open-loop (purely
feed-forward) process [5]. It is often assumed that the conceptual tools
of [[Emergence]] and complexity science can capture this process: local
rules executed recursively in parallel across all cells, will result in the
generation of complex growth and form. This is certainly true; indeed
there are now many computational models of complex patterns
emerging from simple processes [6–10]. However, there is an additional
and crucial component of biological morphogenesis which is missed by
purely emergent models: [[Anatomical Homeostasis]] (or more accurately,
[[Anatomical Homeostasis]]), in which the system can pursue multiple different
paths in order to achieve the same anatomical outcome despite novel
circumstances. In effect, biological morphogenesis is not well-described
by bottom-up, open-loop, mechanical models [11–13], but instead exhibits more complex policies as it navigates the space of possible
anatomical shapes despite various perturbations [14]. This includes the
ability to reach the correct target morphology despite damage (e.g.,
bisection of early embryos), scrambling of tissue positions, changes of
cell size and number, as well as numerous alterations of the genome
(reviewed in Refs. [5,14–17]). Numerous kinds of biochemical, biomechanical, and bioelectric prepatterns have been described which can
encode setpoints for anatomical [[Homeostasis]] [18–23].
Understanding how bodies navigate anatomical [[Morphospace]],
including the nature and limits of reliability, the possible failure modes,
and the optimal intervention strategies is crucial for advances in
* Corresponding author. Department of Biology, [[Tufts University]], Medford, MA, 02155, USA.
E-mail address: michael.levin@tufts.edu (M. Levin).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ybbrc
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2024.150396
Received 18 April 2024; Received in revised form 3 July 2024; Accepted 11 July 2024

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
[[Evo-Devo]], the bioengineering of synthetic life
forms, the biomedicine of birth defects and regenerative therapeutics,
and adaptive robotics [24,25]. This specifically requires models of how
the behaviors of [[Individuality]] cells scale up to adaptive responses at the
level of the entire body. What mechanisms allow the coordination of cell
activity toward one consistent morphology? In particular, any theory
has to provide a hypothesis for how the homeostatic capabilities of individual cells relate to the much more complex [[Homeostatic Setpoint]] of
the collective.
One candidate mechanism that has been proposed is [[Dukkha]] – a
concept with a rich history in physics and materials engineering and a
good candidate for a generic principle of biological organization at the
system level [26–29]. Stress is a popular topic in biology, studied at the
level of DNA damage and protein misfolding, tissue morphomechanics,
immunomodulation, behavior, and even whole ecosystems [27,30–37].
We have previously proposed [38] that the generic concept of stress – as
a biophysical marker of the [[Stress (As Error Signal)]] (distance between the current state and a homeostatic setpoint) – can be extended to the
morphogenetic process. For example, the limb of the salamander will
re-grow when amputated; the most remarkable part of this process is
that it knows when to stop: growth and remodeling ceases when a correct salamander limb is completed [39,40]. Similarly, when a tail is
transplanted to a limb-specific location in amphibia, it slowly remodels
into a limb – the structure more appropriate to the bodyplan [41,42].
This, and other examples such as craniofacial corrections of scrambled
amphibian faces [43–45], can be modeled as a progressive [[Homeostatic Loops]]: cells continue to move and adjust until the error is within
tolerance. The impetus that maintains activity could be seen as a stress
reduction drive, as occurs at every other level of biological organization.
Thus, in our models, stress reflects the degree of error – the distance (in
this case, in [[Anatomical Morphospace]]) that the system can detect with
respect to its prepattern. It is clear that many biological systems can
detect and correct anatomical error (see examples in Refs. [5,17]); here,
we focus not on these mechanisms but on the dynamics of the mediator
of error information: stress.
While the molecular mechanisms of stress sensing, and the degree of
conservation of specific molecules as bearers of the systemic stress signal
from subcellular to multicellular scales, are currently under study and
largely unknown, one interesting hypothesis concerns the role of stress
sharing as a mechanism for the functional [[Cooperation]] of cells in vivo.
Consider a cell in the wrong position of a developing tissue and its positional information gradient (cell “I”, in Fig. 1A). The cell is motivated
to move, to relieve its stress; however, its neighbors are at their correct
positions and their low stress causes strong functional inertia not to
move away from their current low-energy configuration. The individual
cell-scale [[Homeostatic Loops]] prevent cooperation in this case and the
optimal anatomical configuration is not reached (Fig. 1.A1).
However, one simple way to resolve this problem would be to allow
[[Stress Sharing]] molecules to leak out of the source cell and diffuse outward to neighboring cells. If all cells interpret these conserved, shared
molecular signals as stress, a given cell cannot tell if its high stress
sensation is due to a problem it has or a problem its neighbors have. A cell
that is leaking stress raises the exploratory activity level temperature of
the nearby cells [46] (a quantity known as temperature, in the physics of
annealing systems), making them more plastic and willing to perform
active behaviors because they do not rate their current state as a satisfactory, low-energy [[Attractor State]]. This lowers the barrier for them to
undergo exploratory motion in the space, allowing the other cell to move
through to lower its stress level, at which point the whole tissue is at the
optimal lowest-energy configuration and every cells’ stress is reduced
(Fig. 1A2). This kind of scheme is common in computational models of
biological networks [47–49], and produces cooperation without explicit
mechanisms of altruism. By sharing stress with neighbors, one cell’s (or
region’s) problem becomes everyone’s problem, leading to a higher
willingness to adopt new configurations in which everyone’s free energy
is lower (and thus, more optimal morphogenetic problem-solving).
This hypothesis makes some strong predictions about the robustness
of [[Morphogenesis]] with and without such a stress sharing mechanism.
However, in multiscale systems with emergent behaviors it is often not
obvious how well such a mechanism would work, or what the resulting
dynamics would be, without quantitative simulation. Here, we test those
predictions in an in silico model of morphogenesis. In our model,
migrating cells working to implement homeostatic target morphologies
were either allowed or disallowed from sharing their stress during the
process of rearranging in space.
We analyzed this model in three conditions, with the first being
designed to test the impact of stress sharing and the last two being null
hypothesis controls. First, our experimental mode with stress sharing, in
which the individual cellular homeostats, in which stress is proportional
to distance from their homeostatic setpoint, do propagate their stress to
other cells. By analyzing these results, we find interesting phenomena
that suggest that stress sharing is an easy way to achieve robustness in
collectives made up of homeostatic subunits.
Second, a mode in which cells are agents and possess certain competencies that modify the resulting phenotypic fitness – they still have
homeostatic loops governed by stress but they do not export it to their
neighbors [50,51].
Third, a “direct development” mode in which phenotypes are hardwired from the genotype, mirroring many uses of genetic algorithms and
numerous theoretical biology or [[Artificial Life]] studies which omit the
developmental layer between them (no homeostatic [[Competency]] or
[[Regulative Development]]). By comparing the data, we find interesting and
important roles of stress sharing as a dynamic that facilitates collective
problem-solving.
2. Methods
We modeled (see Supplements S1 and S2 for technical approach and
code execution details) embryos achieving a [[Homeostatic Setpoint]] in-silico;
the target morphology we chose was similar to the “[[Bioelectric Prepattern]]”
[[Bioelectric Prepattern]] known to exist during frog embryogenesis [52].
We assessed the impact of embryogenesis on the morphogenetic process
by encoding embryos with different developmental routines and
comparing their reorganization potential. All developmental routines
involved varying degrees of stress sharing between cellular components
as encoded by their genome. Apart from comparing developmental
routines on an individual scale, we also sought to compare its effects on
an evolutionary scale by wrapping the developmental process within an
evolutionary algorithm.
In our framework, an embryo was treated as a collection of cells
within a two-dimensional (2D) grid. We chose a two-dimensional (2D)
matrix data structure to be its computational equivalent for modelling,
referring to its elements as cells (analogous to biological cells). Thus, our
biological tissue is simplified as a discretized lattice, conceptually
related to Chua’s cellular neural networks [53]. Embryos were grouped
into three different kinds based on their cells’ ability to reorganize
themselves during development: (1) stress-sharing embryo: wherein
cells moved by sharing their stress, (2) without-stress-sharing embryo:
where cells could move, but could not share their stress levels with
others, and (3) hardwired: where cells could not move at all. The first
two types thus included a developmental layer between genotype and
phenotype, while the third simulated an organism with no regulative
development, where the connections between genotype and phenotype
was much more direct [51].
Our primary goal was to observe how the presence of a developmental process, – which acted as a layer separating the initial substrate
of the embryo from its reorganized state – altered the evolutionary dynamics of a population. To quantify this, we evolved populations of
embryos using a genetic algorithm (GA). Since our genetic algorithm
had to account for a developmental stage during the life cycle of an
embryo, it was an iterative sequence of the following stages: 1. Development, 2. Selection, and 3. Mutation (Fig. 2).
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
(caption on next page)
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
During initialization, each embryo (i.e., each 2D matrix) was
initialized with one of two cell types (0 or 1) and were patterned in a
stochastic manner to give a scrambled appearance to their structure
(Fig. 2A.I). Each embryo within a population was initialized similarly
with a unique scrambled pattern and the specific pattern itself was
treated as its genome. In addition, the genome also encoded a separate
value (the reorganization gene marker) which indicated the type of
developmental reorganization it could undergo during the upcoming
developmental stage.
2.1. [[Dukkha]]-based development
Post initialization, a population of embryos underwent development
(the first stage of the genetic algorithm). During development, embryos
reorganized their cells to resemble a target two-dimensional pattern
which we pre-specified in our experiments to be binary image of a
smiling face (Fig. 2A.II). Based on the kind of reorganization gene
marker encoded in its genome, an embryo could either undergo reorganization by sharing its stress, by not sharing its stress, or by not using
stress at all.
Stress was a binary signal which indicated whether a particular cell
was in its correct x, y coordinate position (with respect to the target) or
not. Since our initial embryo was scrambled, most of its cells were bound
to be stressed. Stressed cells were inherently driven to move somewhere
(they possessed a sense of restlessness), the question of where to move to
was based on another signal which we called the distress signal.
A distress signal originated in those cells which were not stressed (we
called these “fixed cells”). Each of these fixed cells had a tendency to
observe their neighbors (a 3x3 neighborhood around them) and to check
if there were any stressed cells present. On recognizing the presence of a
stressed cell in a particular direction within their 3x3 neighborhood,
they would send a radially diminishing signal (which had a strength of
1.0 at its origin, but radially diminished in strength) encoding the
presence and the location of a stressed cell. This process was analogous
to how cells at a wounded site send signals elsewhere requesting assistance. In our case, a fixed cell, requested assistance in a particular
location by sending a distress signal.
It is important to note that not all cells received this distress signal.
First, only stressed cells received it, and second, only those stressed cells
carrying a cell-value of the opposite kind received it: As an example,
suppose a fixed cell (say, F1) identifies a stressed cell (say, S1) of celltype “0” located on top of it; the stressed cell, S1, is precisely stressed
because it is of the wrong cell type at the wrong x, y location). Thus, the
fixed cell, F1 recognizes this and sends a distress signal to the rest of the
2D grid, requesting some other distant stressed cell (say S2) with the
opposite cell-type “1” to move to the place of S1, thereby relieving its
stress.
The above example is a simplification; in practice, multiple distress
signals were sent out simultaneously, and stressed cells could receive
and accumulate these signals to move to a specific target location. Once
distress signals were captured by stressed cells, they moved.
Movement occurred sequentially. At each instance, a single stressed
cell in the grid was chosen at random, and its distress-signal-record from
various sources was consulted. Its destination for movement was chosen
as that location from which the distress signal was strongest in value.
The chosen stressed cell moved to its target by repeatedly swapping with
intermediate elements in the direction of shortest path.
2.2. Types of cell-movement ([[Cellular Competency]]) and the concept of
stress-sharing
During cell movement, we had to deal with a problem: what would
happen to the fixed elements which were in the way of a stressed cell as
it moved towards its destination? If the stressed element swapped with
fixed cells, it would dislodge them causing them to become stressed
(thereby increasing the overall stress rather than decreasing it). We
solved this problem by disallowing stressed elements to swap with intermediate fixed elements i.e., by default, if a stressed element
encountered a fixed element while making its way towards its chosen
destination, it could not move any further and would get stuck.
A special case which over-rode this default, was when we prespecified stressed cells to share their stress with its neighbors. Since
stress was a binary signal (0 or 1), a stressed cell communicated its status
as a stressed cell to a fixed neighbor during movement. This communication process was termed “stress-sharing” and the effect it had was a
coercion of the fixed cell to create a passage (a de facto tunnel) for
movement through it rather than by swapping with it (Fig. 1B). Thus, on
receiving a shared signal of stress from a stressed cell moving towards its
destination, the fixed cell created a temporary channel, which allowed
the stressed cell to swap with other stressed cells through it. In case
multiple fixed cells stood in the way of the moving stressed cell, stress
sharing ensured a tunnel was created through all of them for movement.
The tunnel induced as a result of the shared stress was temporary.
Once the stressed cell moved away from the tunneled fixed cell, it
reverted back to its original “blocking state”. Such a [[Stress Sharing]]
mechanism, allowed the possibility of free, unrestricted movement towards all parts of the discrete grid, preventing dislocation of fixed cells
from their grid positions during cell-movement. An alternate form of the
Fig. 1. Schematic of experimental setup
(A): A simplified diagram of one typical scenario during [[Morphogenesis]] in which stress sharing is hypothesized to help solve the problem. Cell I (red) is motivated to
move upward until it reaches a specific position in a morphogen gradient. (A1) Before and after, in the absence of stress sharing: cell I will not get to its intended spot
because all the other cells’ target states are met and they have no incentive to move enough to let cell I pass, no matter how much stress cell I is feeling due to the
error state of its current position. Thus, a permanent defect will remain. (A2) Before and after, in the presence of stress sharing: if the stress molecule(s) representing
the delta between its gradient setpoint and its current position can leak (or be exported) our of cell I, they will affect nearby cells. Since stress molecules are conserved
among all cells within a given body, the neighboring cells will be stressed by their microenvironment, which raises their [[Plasticity]] and enables them to let cell I pass
through. When it gets to the correct position, its stress levels reduce and the whole cell sheet’s stress levels reach low levels because the entire collective is in a lowenergy state with respect to all of their setpoints. In this way, a systemic [[Stress Response]] mechanism, implemented by conserved stress molecules that leak from
specific cells, could facilitate large-scale problem-solving by de-localizing incentive to work toward group goals ([[Cooperation]] without built-in altruism, since all the
cells are simply trying to reduce their own local stress levels). The leak mechanism enables the collective to bend the energy landscape for the [[Individuality]] cells to
exploit their homeostatic optimization behavior towards a tissue-level patterning goal. (B): Process of cell movement with and without stress sharing in embryos: The
target task was for cells within a randomly initialized 2D matrix/embryo to re-arrange themselves towards a pre-set target pattern (a smiling face binary image in our
setup). Stressed cells (B.I) (i.e, cells which are not in their correct positions to form the pre-set morphogenetic pattern) were allowed to move by picking other
stressed cells as target and moving towards them through local swaps. By default, a stressed cell was not allowed to disturb other fixed cells (cells which were already
in their correct positions). However, when given the ability, stressed cells could share their stress with their fixed neighbors, urging them to provide a path for
movement towards the target (B.II). Consequently two kinds of competencies were setup: One with stress sharing (B.II), and one without (B.IV). In the case where
sharing was not allowed, a stressed cell surrounded by other fixed cells would have no way of moving through, causing it to get blocked locally (B.IV). In the case
where sharing was allowed, blocked stressed cells would spread their stress to an area of size 3x3 around them (shown in orange), thereby communicating an intent
of movement; in response, a channel would be created by the fixed cells for the stressed cell to move towards the target location. (Stages I, II, and III). With each
resolved cell movement, the stress map was updated (B.III). Such a process occurred iteratively until either the [[Competency]] limit was reached or the target pattern
was formed. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
(caption on next page)
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
reorganization process, one which [[Dissociative Identity Disorder]] not involve [[Stress Sharing]] was
also considered. In such cases, a stressed cell would get stuck as soon as
it encountered a fixed cell while moving towards its destination in the
direction of shortest path.
To summarize, an embryo could undergo one of three different kinds
of reorganization: 1. With [[Dukkha]] sharing, 2. Without stress sharing, and
3. Hardwired. Since the first two methods involved local cell movement
they were termed competent strategies. The hardwired case served as a
control to the other two competent strategies. The cells of a hardwired
embryo could not move and thus lacked a reorganization process;
development during evolution only served as a placeholder, without any
functional significance.
Post-development, embryos possessed a transformed structure and
the resulting grid organization was termed its Phenotype. Thus, the
developmental stage served as an independent layer separating the genotype from the phenotype. Definitions of the genotype and the
phenotype, as they have been used here, have loose connections with
biology and assume special meaning only here. Demarcating these two
phases allowed us to monitor the impact of the reorganization process
on fitness throughout evolution (Fig. 2).
2.3. Fitness function
Our genetic algorithm served as a search process over genotypes
which best reorganized themselves according to the target pattern (a
smiling face in our experiments). The fitness value of any embryo was
determined by its l2 distance, d with the target.
d = 1
N2
( ∑
N
i=0
∑
N
j=0
(
Ei,j −Ti,j
)2
)1
Where Ei,j and Ti,j are the (i, j)th elements of the embryo and the target
respectively. Intuitively, the fitness function provided a quantitative
metric of how close the embryo was to the target morphogenetic pattern.
During evolution, we noticed significant differences between populations in higher fitness values than lower fitness values. To make this
apparent, we zoomed into higher fitness values by exponentiating the
l2 distance as follows:
dʹ = 9d
Given the presence of a developmental step, two separate configurations of the embryo existed during a single cycle of the GA: 1. The state
of the embryo prior to development (as the genotype) and 2. The state of
the embryo post development (as the phenotype). Consequently, two
kinds of fitness existed: the genotypic fitness, which measured the fitness
of the genotype; and the phenotypic fitness, which measured the fitness
of the phenotype. An exception occurred in hardwired embryos: since
they lacked [[Competency]], their phenotype was equivalent to their genotype and thus their phenotypic fitness was equivalent to its genotypic
fitness.
2.4. Kinds of embryos
The genotype of each embryo carried a “reorganization-marker”
indicating the kind of developmental reorganization it could undergo
during development. Each embryo was categorized into three different
kinds based on this gene marker as follows: 1. With stress sharing embryo. 2. Without stress sharing embryo, and 3. Hardwired embryo. The
first two categories had a general ability for reorganization, and were
termed as “competent”, in the sense of problem-solving ability of active
tissues to restore correct shapes despite induced barriers, perturbations,
and other interventions [5,54]. Alternatively, the hardwired embryo
was
not-competent
and
possessed
a
fixed
structure
throughout
development.
2.5. Populations for evolution
Our genetic algorithm evolved populations of embryos of three
different kinds: 1. Stress sharing population, 2. Without stress-sharing
population, and 3. Hardwired population. To create a population of
size M; M 2D-matrices of size N were initialized by randomly scrambling
the target pattern (also of size N). We initialized grids this way in order
to maintain the same number of cell types (0’s and 1’s) across both the
initialized embryo and the target. It ensured simplicity and allowed us to
focus on reorganization rather than “growing” the required kind of cell
types to satisfy the target pattern.
2.6. Genetic algorithm
We evolved each population by passing it iteratively through a
sequential process of: 1. Development, 2. Selection, and 3. Mutation.
During the selection stage, phenotypic fitnesses were used to select the
best genotypes for the subsequent generation (Darwinian selection). In
order to repopulate the population with variant genotypes we mutated
the selected genotypes by stochastically moving a few cells to random
locations. At the end of each generation, we plot the phenotypic fitness
and the genotypic fitness of the embryo with the highest phenotypic
fitness in the population (see Supplement S2 for more details).
2.7. Competency value and cell-Distance
Embryos with competency (either with stress sharing or without
stress sharing) were given a pre-determined “competency value”. This
value provided an upper bound to the number of swaps the cells of the
embryo could execute during the developmental step. We also monitored the total distance travelled by these cells by calculating the
average Euclidean-distance moved by elements during a generation.
Fig. 2. Genetic algorithm Schematic
(A): Initialization: Prior to evolution, a population of genomes which served as the substrate for evolution were initialized. A genome in our framework was a
randomly initialized two-dimensional matrix containing two cell-types (0, indicated in black, and 1, indicated as white) (A.I). The genome also carried a marker
indicating the type of development an embryo could undergo during the first stage of evolution i.e: development. Three kinds of reorganizaton processs were defined:
1. Stress sharing based reorganization, 2. Reorganization without stress sharing, and 3. Hardwired (no reorganization). A target for evolution was also set. To this
end, we chose a downsampled binary image of a smiling face as the target pattern which evolution had to optimize over (A.II). (B): Development: The first stage of
evolution involved a process of cellular reorganization of the initialized matrices. Reorganization would be based on the gene marker encoded in the genomes of each
embryo. This stage served to mimic the developmental stage observed during an organism’s lifetime. Post development, the reorganized cell-structure was termed the
embryo’s phenotype. Thus, the developmental process served as an independent layer separating the genotype of an embryo from its phenotype. (C): Selection: Prior
to development, the fitness of each genome was recorded by comparing it with the target (l2 −
distance). And Post development, the fitness of the corresponding
phenotype was also recorded using its l2 −distance with the target. During selection, phenotypic fitnesses of the top 10 % of the population were chosen and, their
corresponding genomes were selected (Darwinian selection) for evolution in the next generation and the rest were discarded. (D): Mutation: The selected for genomes
constituted 10 % of the original population. To repopulate the population back to its original strength, selected genomes were mutated by randomly swapping cellpairs within the genome. The resulting mutated genome served as a new embryo. Post re-population, a new cycle of evolution began marked by the onset of
development.
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
2.8. Statistical analyses
To observe the impact of [[Stress Sharing]] during evolution, we plot the
fitness curves of each population (with [[Dukkha]] sharing, without stress
sharing, and hardwired), over 1000 generations. 95 % confidence intervals (CI) over 10 runs of each experiment were plotted to verify if any
of the CI bands of any population overlapped with each other across
1000 generations. A lack of overlap suggested a significant difference in
evolutionary dynamics. Further, we measured the statistical difference
between different populations at arbitrary points during evolution and
carried out a t-test between samples of any two populations to quantify
their similarity.
3. Results
3.1. Stress sharing helps populations solve the problem of [[Morphogenesis]]
faster
To determine whether a cellular rearrangement process involving
stress sharing helps in discovering the optimal morphogenetic process
faster, we compared the evolution of three different populations insilico, each with a different kind of cellular rearrangement process
over 1000 generations.
The experiment consisted of running a population of embryos
through a genetic algorithm. The genetic algorithm (GA) involved an
iterative process of development, selection, and mutation. The developmental step was introduced to allow a genotype to change into a
phenotype before selection (Fig. 2). Three different populations were
evolved through our GA: 1. a population which relied on stress sharing
to rearrange itself; 2. a population which relied on stress but had no
sharing capacity, 3. a population which had no rearrangement capability (hardwired). We plot the phenotypic fitness (Fig. 3A.I) and the
genotypic fitness (Fig. 3A.II) of the embryo with the highest phenotypic
fitness in each of these populations over 1000 generations averaged over
10 runs to observe their morphogenetic ability.
We observed that populations with stress-sharing were able to
discover the correct genotype and the [[Competency]] necessary to form the
target pattern faster than the other two populations (Fig. 3A). Members
of this population discovered how to arrive at the target pattern by
generation 500, at which a population with sharing had a significantly
different phenotypic fitness from either the hardwired (p≪0.01), or that
of the population without sharing (p≪0.01). Further, the confidence
intervals of these curves [[Dissociative Identity Disorder]] not overlap, indicating their distinct separation from one another (Fig. 3A.I).
The way in which stress sharing populations derived their advantage
was by progressively improving their genotype during the early stages of
evolution (Fig. 3A.II), behaving as if they were a hardwired population
(we found no statistical difference between the two until generation
~400 (p = 0.9). In contrast, populations without stress sharing
improved their genomes only fractionally above their initialized states
(Fig. 3A.II) and relied exclusively on their competency to achieve high
phenotypic fitness towards the target (Fig. 3A.I). Such a strategy paid off
early during evolution (until generation ~400) but resulted in diminishing gains post this point (Fig. 3A.I).
We verified the phenotypes of the best embryo in each of these
populations at generation 0, 250, 750, and 1000. We observed that at
generation 250, all three populations had a similarly distorted pattern as
confirmed by their approximately similar fitness values (Fig. 3B).
Further, the stress-sharing and the without stress-sharing populations
had a similar fitness value (=0.88) at this point (Fig. 3A.I, p = 0.97),
even though the population without-sharing engaged in a different dynamic compared to the other two populations (Fig. 3). At generation
750, despite their similar dynamics early on during evolution, the embryos with stress sharing were capable of forming the target pattern,
whereas the hardwired population could not; however, we noted that it
does perform better than the population without-stress sharing. At
generation 1000, we observed the hardwired embryos being closer to
maximum fitness with a positive slope of 0.19 compared to the population without sharing (slope = 0.05).
We conclude that populations with stress sharing discover the correct
morphological solution faster than hardwired populations or populations without stress sharing. Hardwired populations, relying on
mutations alone, are eventually capable of achieving high fitness, while
populations without-sharing are worse than hardwired populations over
long time scales.
3.2. Stress sharing helps populations with a range of complexity solve
morphogenesis
In our first experiment, each embryo within a population was a
matrix of size 30x30. To determine how sharing benefits populations of
cells of different sizes, we initialized multiple instances of the previous
experiment each with a different grid size and compared their fitness
curves over 1000 generations. Specifically, we ran three instances of the
previous experiment, with grid sizes 20x20, 30x30, and 50x50. Within
each instance, we compared the performance of the stress-sharing
population with the hardwired and without-sharing populations by
observing their fitness curves (Fig. 4).
We observed that for a grid size of 20x20 (Fig. 4A), stress-sharing
populations were able to reach maximum phenotypic fitness by ~
generation 100; hardwired populations were able to reach maximum
phenotypic fitness at generation 1000 and a population without sharing
was unable to reach phenotypic maximum fitness even after 1000 generations of evolution (Fig. 4A.I). The genomes of the stress-sharing and
hardwired populations evolved identically during the early stages of
evolution (until ~ generation 100 throughout which we noticed no
statistical difference (p = 0.96) post which the stress-sharing population
stabilized. (Fig. 4A.II). Genomes of the without-stress-sharing population improved marginally above its initialized state.
At a grid size of 30x30, a similar pattern of evolutionary behavior
emerged: the stress-sharing population reached maximum phenotypic
fitness faster, followed by hardwired with a rising slope (=0.19) at
generation 1000, and the without sharing population with a stable
phenotypic fitness around ~0.91 at generation 1000 (Fig. 4B.I). Genomes exhibited identical patterns as well: the stress-sharing and
hardwired populations had similar early stage dynamics (until generation 400) (p = 0.96), post which the stress-sharing population’s genome
stagnated. The without-sharing population’s genome improved by less
than 20 % above its initialized state (Fig. 4B.II). Further, we observed
that these dynamics were all right-shifted versions (with respect to time)
of the experiment with grid size 20x20. Generally, populations of size
30x30 took a longer time to reach the same phenotypic fitness level as in
20x20, and genomes of the stress-sharing population stabilized after a
longer time (~300 generations longer).
At a grid size of 50x50, 1000 generations were insufficient for any of
the three populations to reach maximum phenotypic fitness (Fig. 4C.I).
However, general patterns similar to those seen at lower grid sizes were
observed: phenotypic fitness of the stress-sharing population evolved
similarly to the hardwired population until generation 400 (p = 0.96),
followed by a short term decrease, before rising back up to hardwired
levels. The without-sharing population exhibited early gains but stabilized closer to generation 1000 (Fig. 4C.I). Trends in genotypic fitness
revealed a similar dynamic to those seen in lower grid sizes (20x20, and
30x30): the hardwired and stress-sharing population evolved similarly,
however, unlike lower grid sizes, its dynamics dropped momentarily
before reaching hardwired levels. The without-stress sharing population
exhibited relatively modest improvement of its genome, but we note
that it is higher than either of the previous two grid sizes.
We conclude that as grid size increases, the problem of morphogenesis grows harder, with populations requiring a longer time to reach
peak fitness. Despite the increase in complexity, a stress-sharing population can utilize its competency to reach maximum fitness. The benefit
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
(caption on next page)
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
of [[Dukkha]]-sharing is especially noticed in the later stages of evolution
when mutations cannot be relied upon to solve the problem efficiently,
and more precise cell movements are required.
3.3. [[Stress Sharing]] encourages cell-movement over long distances
How does stress sharing help the collective achieve its morphogenetic objective? We next tested the hypothesis that the sharing of stress
information facilitates the movement of cells over longer distances. To
quantify its effect to fitness improvement, we plotted the [[Competency]]
value and the average Euclidean distance travelled by cells of the best
embryo in each of the three populations throughout evolution.
Specifically, we initialized populations with members of size 30x30
and ran them through our GA for 1000 generations. In each generation,
we picked the embryo whose phenotypic fitness was the highest and
traced its genotypic fitness (Fig. 5A.II), competency value (Fig. 5A.III),
and the average Euclidean distance travelled by its cells within that
generation (Fig. 5A.IV). Each embryo was given a maximum possible
competency value of 4725 which was determined as a function of its grid
size, N (see Supplement S3)
We observed that the stress-sharing population utilized maximum
competency (=4725) until ~ generation 400, beyond which its value
dropped to ~4500 and remained approximately stable thereafter. The
population without stress-sharing utilized a competency of ~100
throughout evolution and the hardwired population used 0 competency
because it wasn’t allowed to use competency by design (Fig. 5A.III).
Further, the cells of the best embryo (i.e., with the highest phenotypic fitness) in the stress-sharing population moved an average
Euclidean distance of ~2500 units until ~ generation 400, post which it
varied around a value of ~2400 units. In case of the population without
stress-sharing - owing to its lower usage of competency – cells moved an
average of ~200 units throughout evolution (Fig. 5A.IV).
We conclude from these observations that stress-sharing is beneficial
precisely because it enables cells to move over longer distances through
a stress-communication mechanism (Fig. 5A). Owing to the approximate
nature of such movement, stress-sharing embryos are capable of utilizing a high degree of competency (Fig. 5A.III) to solve the morphogenetic
puzzle. In contrast, a population without stress-sharing lacks such a
communication mechanism and is therefore restricted to local cellmovements. Movement restriction enforces a limit on competency
causing embryos to perform poorly. The Hardwired population leverages mutations to solve the morphogenetic task better than a competent
population with no stress sharing.
3.4. Stress sharing increases cells’ radius of influence
We then sought to study these dynamics from the perspective of the
[[Cognitive Light Cone Model]] [55], which focuses on the radius in space
and time of events that any given [[Self]] can use as a homeostatic
setpoint. In effect, taking the agent’s perspective in terms of what it
functionally “cares about” [56–59].
As a cell moves towards its target position during development, it
disturbs other cells, knocking them out of position and altering their
future fates towards a target position. To quantify the range over which
a given cell alters the fate of another cell, we plot the maximum radius
over which a cell dislodges another cell at each stage of development.
Specifically, we took a single embryo of each kind (with sharing and
without sharing), passed it through the developmental stage, and plot
the maximum radius over which cells dislodged other cells in each
developmental step (Fig. 5 B).
We observed that in an embryo with stress-sharing, a cell influenced
another cell located a radius of 30 units on average at developmental
step-1. This distance progressively decreased over development, with
the value dropping to zero at step 85 (Fig. 5B.I). In contrast, in an embryo without sharing, a cell altered the fate of another cell located at a
radius of only 5 units on average at development step 1, with development ceasing completely by step 10. (Fig. 5B.I).
An alternative view of the radius of influence over developmental
time is shown in Fig. 5 B.II, and 5.B.III, which better illustrates the
impact of stress-sharing over developmental time. We plotted the radius
of influence as a rectangular bar of proportionate size, and stacked
multiple such blocks at developmental steps of 5, 20, 35, 65, 80, and 85
for the stress-sharing embryo (Fig. 5B.II), and at steps 1 and 10 for the
without-stress sharing embryo. (Fig. 5B.III).
We conclude that stress sharing increases the [[Cognitive Light Cone]] of
an embryo compared to an embryo without stress sharing (Fig. 5B.I). As
development proceeds, the radius of the cognitive light cone decreases,
lasting longer for an embryo with stress sharing (Fig. 5B.II), but terminating prematurely in case of an embryo without sharing (Fig. 5B.III).
Sequential [[Morphogenesis]] causes stress to fluctuate over the course
of development.
Next, to observe the spatio-temporal time course of stress during
development, we manually broke down the target pattern (smiling face)
into a set of sequential targets and observed how stress varied as each
target pattern was introduced. Specifically, we broke down the target
pattern of the smiling face into a set of discrete components: left eye
only > right eye only > eyes only > eyes and smile > complete face. We
set each of these components as the target pattern starting from the “lefteye only” target and moving towards the “complete face” target. We
introduced a new target only when development had optimized the
source pattern to the current target pattern. We identified this point by
observing the stress value: as long as it decreased, optimization was
treated as in-progress.
We took a single embryo of each kind (stress-sharing & without
stress-sharing), scrambled their elements randomly from the final target
pattern (complete face), and then let them develop towards each
sequential partial target pattern, and plotted the average stress within
the embryo throughout development (Fig. 6).
Fig. 3. Stress Sharing results in solving the problem of morphogenesis faster than without stress sharing or without reorganization competency (hardwired)
(A).I: Phenotypic fitness curves of populations of embryos (size 30x30) post competent cellular rearrangement are shown. Populations with stress sharing based
competency (green) reached maximum fitness by generation 400, which was faster than populations without stress sharing (orange) (p≪0.01) or those without any
competency at all (black curve; hardwired population) (p ≪0.01) at generation 400. In the absence of stress sharing (orange), a competent population performed
worse than a hardwired population (black) post generation 400.
(A.II): Genotypic fitness curves of populations of embryos (size 30x30) prior to competent cellular rearrangement. The genomes of a competent population w/stress
sharing improved in a manner similar to that of a hardwired population until ~ generation 400 (p = 0.9), post which it plateaued.
(B): Embryos post competent cellular rearrangement (phenotypes) at different stages of evolution are shown. Grids correspond to those embryos with the best
phenotypic fitness in any generation.
(B.I) (w/sharing): Starting from a randomly initialized grid of binary values (generation 0, row1, column 1), the target pattern (a smiling face) was achieved by ~
generation 400 (Fig: A.I)
(B.II) (w/o sharing): Similar to row 1, embryos were initialized randomly with a different seed value. By generation 1000 (row 2, column 4), the final pattern was
partially achieved.
(B.III) (hardwired): In case of a hardwired embryo, its cells were not allowed to move. Thus, improvements were possible only through mutations to the grid
structure. We noticed that the target pattern was almost achieved in this case, outperforming a population w/o sharing (row3) (fitness of 0.975 (hardwired) vs 0.91
(w/o sharing) at generation 1000). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
(caption on next page)
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
We observed that in both kind of grids, [[Dukkha]] fluctuated. On introducing a target pattern, stress momentarily increased and then
continued to decrease until the current target pattern was attained to the
best possible extent by the [[Competency]] process of the grid. In a stresssharing embryo, stress progressively decreased until the relevant
target pattern was perfectly achieved (Fig. 6A), whereas in embryos
without [[Stress Sharing]], the target pattern was only partially formed due
to the constrained cell-movement within its elements (Fig. 6B). Consequently, a stress-sharing embryo was capable of perfectly forming each
sequential target pattern and stress was able to reach zero at step 40
(Fig. 6A). The without-sharing embryos however, was unable to form
any of the sequential target patterns well. Tiny improvements of ~1 % in
fitness were noticed between each sequential pattern, but progress was
limited to movement of less than 55 cells on average (compared to 4500
cells on average for the stress-sharing embryo) and development lasted
for 10 steps only (Fig. 6B).
We conclude that sequentially introducing new features increases the
average stress, but given enough competency and a communication
mechanism (sharing), [[Individuality]] features can be formed perfectly with
the corresponding feature’s average stress reducing to zero. However,
without a communication mechanism, no matter the competency value,
cells are restricted in their movement and tend to get stuck in localized
patches. Thus, a communication mechanism tied to their homeostatic
loop (such as stress-sharing) is key if competency is to have an impact on
reorganization capacity.
3.5. Stress is not predictive of the target during development
When studying minimal models of [[Agency]], it’s important to ask what
can be detected by external observers of the [[Self]] vs. what is known
only to the system itself (a primitive version of the privacy property of
minds). Specifically, since stress is a direct measure of the distance to a
morphogenetic setpoint, it might be expected that by observing the
stress maps, it would be possible to guess what pattern the cells were
attempting to implement – to read the goal state of the system. Could an
external observer predict the target pattern being developed by
observing fluctuations in stress? We addressed this question by reducing
an embryo’s reorganization dynamics during development into a series
of stress maps. The stress map of an embryo at any time step was a
gradient of stress in its two-dimensional grid space. It was obtained by
first identifying stressed cells (including those with shared stress) and
drawing its space-gradient. By observing the dynamics of such a stress
map over the course of developmental time, we sought to determine
whether it would reveal the target being formed, as is attempted in the
efforts of [[Neural Decoding]] [60–63] (Fig. 7).
We qualitatively assessed predictability of the target by observing
the in-time variation of the stress map (Fig. 7A) and observing how
visual cues in the stress map allowed predictability, and quantitatively
by plotting a similarity metric (see Supplement S3 for details) between
the stress map and the target pattern (Fig. 7B) to see if a trend emerges
over the course of development.
In this experiment, we employed two different stress-sharing embryos, each of which developed towards two different target patterns (a
thumbs up pattern, and a smiling face pattern). We observed that in both
cases, during the initial stages of development, the stress map provided
partial cues as to the target being formed, but these visual cues disappeared later (at 50 % to completion in both the thumbs-up pattern and
the smiling face pattern), providing no definite hint as to the target
pattern being formed. (Fig. 7.I and Fig. 7.II). Note that at 100 %
completion the stress map would be a blank grid with no stressed cells
and therefore no gradients (see Suppl emental Videos 5 and 6 for
continuous time evolution of their respective stress maps). Further, it
could be that we are observing these “visual cues” precisely because we
are primed to see it. To provide a more quantitative assessment we
resorted to a similarity metric between the stress map and the target.
The similarity metric was chosen to be the inverse l2-distance between
the stress map and the target pattern, existing within [0.0, 1.0] with 0.0
indicating no similarity and 1.0 indicating an exact match.
Observing the similarity plot provided a more confusing picture.
While for the thumbs-up pattern, the stress maps’ similarity with the
target grew from ~0.53 to ~0.63, for the smiling face pattern it
decreased from ~0.48 to ~0.25. Additionally, in each of these plots, we
compared the similarity of a random stress map to the target (black trace
in Fig. 7B) as control. While the random stress map had a similarity
hovering around 0.5, the similarity for the stress sharing embryo varied
based on the target being formed.
We conclude that in the absence of prior knowledge about the target
pattern being formed, it is unlikely that an external observer can predict
the structure being developed by visually inspecting the stress pattern
alone. While the similarity metric can indicate the presence of a nonrandom target being formed, no other [[Predictive Information]] is
apparent from either the stress map or its similarity trend with the target
during development. Thus, while local stress directly reflects the distance of a cell from its optimal position, the ability to share stress prevents a straightforward inference of the system goal from data available
to external observers.
4. Discussion
The ability to make desired changes at the system level (repair of
complex birth defects, induction of [[Regeneration]] of appendages, selfassembly of novel [[Hybrots]], etc.) is hampered by the difficulty of the
[[Inverse Problem]]. In most cases, it is not possible to infer changes in the
genes determining protein sequence must be made in order to reach a
Fig. 4. As grid size increases, the morphogenetic task grows harder; a competent stress sharing mechanism helps in navigating a population to the target solution
(A): Fitness graphs (phenotypic and genotypic) for populations with embryo sizes of 20x20. A competent population w/stress sharing solved the problem by generation 100 (A.I), whereas both the hardwired as well as a population w/o sharing were unable to achieve perfect fitness by generation 1000. Further, the hardwired
population performed comparatively better than a population w/o sharing post ~ generation 350 (p≪0.01). Genomes of the w/sharing population evolved identically to that of a hardwired population until ~ generation 100 (p = 0.96) post which we observed a plateauing of its genome quality (A.II). (B): Fitness graphs for
populations with a grid size of 30x30. A population w/sharing solved the problem in ~400 generations, whereas the hardwired population as well as the population
w/o stress sharing, failed to reach maximum fitness by generation 1000, obtaining a fitness of 0.975 and 0.91 respectively (p≪0.01) (B.I). Genomes of the stresssharing and hardwired populations had similar early stage dynamics (~generation 400, p = 0.96), post which the stress-sharing population’s genome stagnated. The
without-sharing population’s genome improved by less than 20 % above its initialized state (4B.II). Further, we observed that these dynamics were all right-shifted
versions (with respect to time) of the experiment with grid size 20x20. Generally, populations of size 30x30 took a longer time to reach the same phenotypic fitness
level as in 20x20, and genomes of the stress-sharing population stabilized after a longer time (~300 generations longer). (C): Fitness graphs for populations with
embryo sizes of 50x50. A competent population w/sharing (green) improved identically (in phenotypic fitness) to a hardwired population (black) until generation
400 (p = 0.95), by generation 1000 we noticed that its performance was climbing back up to hardwired levels (C.I). Genomes of the w/sharing population improved
identically to that of the hardwired population until generation 400 (p = 0.98). Post which a deviation (identical to that observed in the phenotypic fitness curves)
were noticed. By generation 1000, genomes of the w/sharing population were improving to the level of hardwired individuals (C.II). We were unable to run this
experiment for longer timescales owing to resource constraints. However, we note that both the genotypic and phenotypic dynamics at this scale are right shifted (intime) versions of lower grid sizes (20x20, and 30x30). Consequently, we expect similar future trends in their phenotypic and genotypic fitness. (For interpretation of
the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
(caption on next page)
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
complex anatomical outcome. However, the increasing realization that
biological tissues offer high-level interfaces for control, in the same way
that learning and communication offers behavioral control without
micromanaging [[Individuality]] neurons, suggests novel strategies for their
manipulation which are already beginning to be applied in biomedicine
[24,25].
The flexible, adaptive aspect of [[Morphogenesis]] has been modeled as
a set of navigation policies within [[Anatomical Morphospace]] [14]. By
recasting changes in growth and form as the behavior of cell groups in
transcriptional, physiological, and anatomical problems spaces, all of
the tools of behavioral science and autonomous system engineering
(control theory, [[Cybernetics]]) can be brought to bear [11,12,64]. Specifically, we have argued that advances in bioengineering and [[Regenerative Medicine]] will require a better understanding the policies with
respect to how cellular collectives navigate the landscapes of these
problem spaces under different perturbation [11,12,65]. However, the
development of such strategies relies on a better understanding of how
groups of cells cooperate toward specific outcomes.
A key aspect is that in biology, problem-solving capacity of systems
often derives from the competencies of their parts. [[Dukkha]] in this case is a
motivating driver of homeostatic adjustments for the cells. It should be
noted that some excellent work has been done in the area of understanding how networks (such as gene-regulatory networks) can be
guided by stress dynamics to find their way in high-dimensional spaces
[66–72].
We constructed a model in which [[Anatomical Homeostasis]], driven by
a set of competent sub-agents, can be examined with respect to a
possible role for [[Stress Sharing]]. This model of cellular morphogenesis
allowed us to test the hypothesis that sharing of stress, as an indicator of
error (distance from the [[Homeostatic Setpoint]]), would facilitate morphogenesis, be favored by evolutionary processes, and enlarge the effective
[[Cognitive Light Cone]] of individual cells (increase the scale of goaldirected activity, as befits a mechanism for facilitating [[Collective Intelligence]] dynamics).
4.1. Functional implications of stress sharing
We observed that allowing cells to leak stress to their neighbors is
beneficial for morphogenesis, allowing the cell collective to reach their
target morphology faster and reliably when compared to controls
(Fig. 3). This effect persisted across a range of grid sizes, and was due to
cells being able to move over longer distances. This movement builds in
more freedom and redundancy, which is especially helpful during later
stages of morphogenesis when fine-grained improvements are required
to finish the pattern (Fig. 5). In effect, the propagation of stress implements a kind of implicit altruism: without having to provide a mechanism for cells to coordinate or [[Care]] directly about their neighbors’ state,
a simple leak mechanism ensures that the stress in one region motivates
other cells to work to relieve it. By envisioning leaked stress molecules as
features of the microenvironment around stressed cells, our results are
also consistent with prior proposals that [[Stigmergy]] (ability of subunits,
such as ants or cells, to leave each other messages in an external medium
of the environment) is a universal coordination mechanism [73,74]. We
think that this is precisely the kind of simple mechanism biological
evolution would seize upon, to increase the collectivity of subunits in a
body.
One prediction made by our approach is that cells should leak molecules used as stress markers; indeed, apparently this has been observed
for one such molecule – HSP90, a heat-shock protein which also occurs
extracellularly [75]. We are currently testing these predictions at the
bench, establishing reporter assays for stress and studying how it may
spread and with what consequences.
We have previously studied a different but related effect, in which
competition for informational and metabolic resources by cells within a
single body actually contributes to morphogenetic coordination, such as
for example ensuring identical growth of left and right limbs. When cells
do not compete (acquiring resources from an infinite reservoir), no cell
knows what any other cell [[Dissociative Identity Disorder]] or did not take from that reservoir.
However, finite reservoirs allow cells to coordinate their activity
because the current state of the reservoir provides information about
how much other cells have taken from it. In effect, limiting pools of
resources become a kind of global, stigmergic scratchpad, bearing the
evidence of activity of cells across distance and enabling them to
communicate through this kind of global variable [76,77]. These kind of
mechanisms, along with others based on memory propagation between
cells [55], contribute to the “cognitive glue” that binds individual cells
to common purpose.
4.2. Stress and the cognitive light cone
One way to think about unconventional agents such as groups of cells
is to model the size of their cognitive light cone: the spatio-temporal
distance that represents the size of the largest goal states which their
homeostatic mechanisms can pursue. Multicellular development scales
these cognitive light cones from the single cell-scale metabolic and
transcriptional goals of individual cells to the grandiose, large-scale
setpoints of anatomical structures in [[Morphospace]]. Disorders of this
process, such as [[Cancer]] [78,79], result from a pathological restriction of
this radius of concern, when cells treat the rest of the body as external
environment. Put another way, [[Cognitive Light Cone Model]] [55] formalizes the notion of functional care or concern as being defined by the
distance at which things that happen can stress an [[Self]] to the point of
initiating actions to effect change. To explore the hypothesis that stress
sharing potentiates collectivity and helps scale morphogenetic goals, we
Fig. 5. Stress sharing is beneficial because it encourages cell movement over long distances. (A): Evolution of a population of embryos each with a grid-size of 30x30
over 1000 generations. Genotypic fitness of an embryo with the best phenotypic fitness (A.I), its corresponding phenotypic fitness (A.II), its [[Competency]] value (A.III),
and the average distance travelled by its cells (A.IV) at each generation is shown. A population w/o sharing increases its phenotypic fitness rapidly in the first 200
generations during which it utilizes a competency of 100 units and its cells move an average of 250 units. Post generation 200, its phenotypic fitness stabilizes owing
to its low genotypic fitness and constant utilized competency. Populations with stress sharing behave as if they were hardwired for the first 400 generations despite
utilizing a high degree of competency (~4725 units) (A.III), post which they reach maximum fitness and reduce their competency usage by ~150 units. A high
utilization of competency consequently allows cell movement across large distances in the matrix. Greater freedom causes cells of a stress sharing population to move
as if they were random during the first 400 generations, post which their freedom enables them to achieve cell states with high fitness. (B): Stress sharing increases
the radius over which a cell influences another.
(B.I):Two embryos of size 30x30, one with stress sharing and one without are developed independently. At each stage, the maximum distance over which a cell
influences another cell by changing its future fate is recorded and plot at different intervals in time. As a cell moves towards a distant target, it dislodges other cells
lying in its path, effectively changing their future fates. The radius of influence serves to measure the maximum distance of such influence. The embryo with sharing
has a radius of influence of 30 at developmental stage 1, and decreases in a non-linear manner, eventually reducing to zero at stage 85. On the other hand, an embryo
without sharing has a radius of influence of 5 at stage 1 which terminates to zero at stage 10.
(B.II, B.III): An alternate view of the radius of influence over time for an embryo with sharing and an embryo without sharing respectively. Rectangular blocks of
width proportional to the radius of influence are stacked on top of each other. Blocks are representative of the radius of concern at developmental stages marked on
the x-axis. An embryo with sharing exerts influence over a larger radius for a longer duration of developmental time (5.B.II) than an embryo without stress sharing (5.
B.III).
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
Fig. 6. [[Dukkha]] fluctuates for a population w/sharing, oscillating up and down over the course of development, eventually dropping to zero. (A): Normalized stress
(over all cells in an embryo) over the course of developmental for a competent population with [[Stress Sharing]]. Initially stress is high owing to the random structure of
the embryo’s cellular structure. At the same time, a target (left eye pattern) was set as the target to the developmental process. Once the left eye pattern was achieved
at generation 5, a new target (one with both, left and right eye) was introduced. Once such a pattern was achieved, a new target (a smile, along with the eyes) was set,
and finally, once this pattern was achieved, the entire face was set as target. Throughout such part-by-part [[Morphogenesis]], stress continued to drop and rise corresponding to settling at a target pattern, versus moving towards a new pattern. (B): Normalized stress (over all cells in an embryo) for a population without Stress
sharing. Stress continues to oscillate as patterns are incrementally introduced at various local minima, but optimization towards these patterns fail because cells are
restricted in their movement due to the absence of stress sharing. Stress eventually settles at a non-zero value giving rise to a scrambled pattern. In the absence of
stress sharing, such [[Competency]] relies heavily on mutations to nudge patterns towards a target. Since no mutations were given here, competency [[Dissociative Identity Disorder]] not help.
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
(caption on next page)
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
quantified the [[Cognitive Light Cone]] of cells with and without [[Dukkha]]
sharing.
In our analysis, we saw that enabling the sharing of stress initially
increases the cognitive light cone of cells, as measured by the farthest
distance a given cell can use as the setpoint for its subsequent activity.
This is consistent with a role for [[Stress Sharing]] in enlarging “pro-social”
behaviors in the tissue. However, during its lifetime, each virtual embryo transitions from large-scale rearrangements to small-scale finetuning (similarly to how real development progresses from the major
refactoring of gastrulation to local refinement in late stages). While cells
can take on long-range goals when sharing stress, their effective radius of
concern shrinks over time, as it becomes less relevant to take distant
events into account (Fig. 5B).
These dynamics make an interesting prediction for the biology of
aging [80]. While embryonic development involves progressive reduction of error from a prepattern that keeps changing to pull the embryo
from stage to stage, eventually the prepattern stops changing and major
rearrangements cease – maturity. However, a mature organism is not a
static structure because cells inevitably senesce, die, and must be
replaced. An adult organism is in equilibrium but its new cells must
continuously be placed correctly, not only in [[Anatomical Morphospace]] but also
in physiological and metabolic spaces, when they appear. Thus, the
homeostatic process continues, but with a very small cognitive light
cone that involves only the local microenvironment for resisting tissue
degradation. Our model suggests that modulators of [[Stress Response]] may
be candidate targets to modulate tissue replacement and aging in vivo.
4.3. Stress profiles are private: the 1st person view of an embryo
Our model studied [[Stress Sharing]], and was constructed and
analyzed from a purely functional metric of performance under various
conditions as gauged by an external observer (error function). What
about the valence of stress – what is it like to be an [[Self]], made of silicon
or proteins, at high or low error levels [81–85]? While we don’t know
what it’s like to be a cell or tissue under stress [36,86,87], stress as a
readout of distance from homeostatic equilibrium is a familiar feature of
large-scale biology and of our human experience. There have been
studies of what it’s like to be simulated beings in simplified digital world
[57], although we are not aware of studies that focus on the inner worlds
of goal-directed artificial agents with stress dynamics.
Here we avoid discussion of the deeper questions of stress as felt
prediction error [88–91], metacognitive loops that allow agents to know
what they are doing, and associated issues of first-person perspective
that is so important to adaptive agents. However, our results do offer one
bit of insight into the distinction between the information available to a
system vs. what is perceivable by external observers of the system. We
found that knowledge of the embryonic stress patterns do not enable one
to deduce the morphogenetic goal state it is trying to reach. Such an
agent’s goals are largely inscrutable to externa observers (such as scientists, conspecifics, parasites, predators, etc.) The agent itself can
perceive its homeostatic goal state, because it effectively reaches that
[[Homeostatic Setpoint]] precisely due to the stress distribution. This provides
an interesting, yet primitive, example of “privacy” – a feature of brains
that hampers efforts at [[Neural Decoding]] [60–63], in which some features
of 1st person [[Cognition]] are inaccessible to 3rd person observers [92,93].
Apparently, even simple systems such as our virtual embryogeny [94,
95], with stress sharing, exhibit emergent features of privacy in the
context of homeostatic collectives.
4.4. Limitations of the model
Our model has a number of limitations that warrant possible extensions in future work. First, it is 2-dimensional – it is not known how such
dynamics would play out in three, or higher-dimensional morphospaces.
Moreover, our simulation tries to model the dynamics of each and every
cell (albeit in a simpler discrete manner) rendering it too expensive to
scale. Evolutionary simulations are especially intractable beyond an
embryo size of 50x50 on a 256-core machine. A reductionist approach to
stress sharing might reduce the simulation burden and enable further
scaling. Regardless, massively parallel computing architectures will
need to be considered to study a bio-realistic numbers of cells.
Our simulation takes place in a fixed, discrete grid, which cannot
itself deform as cells move. As such, it does not capture some of the
recurrent complexity of [[Morphogenesis]] in which the action landscape of
cells is modified by other cells’ actions. And, we only simulated two
different cell states, reducing the possible complexity. Furthermore, we
[[Dissociative Identity Disorder]] not include multi-scale stress – future models will study the interplay
of stress at different levels of organization in the same virtual embryo,
from the molecular to the cell-, tissue-, and whole organism level, as new
dynamics and problem-solving behaviors may emerge when homeostats
are coupled [13,96].
5. Conclusion
[[Homeostasis]], and mechanisms which expand the size of the goal
states towards which it works, is a central concept for understanding
[[Agency]] [97–99], regenerative [[Competency]] [11,12], and evolution [50,
54,100–102]. Thus, future empirical work must identify mechanisms by
which stress is sensed and distributed within and across groups of cells.
Existing tools of molecular genetics and biophysics can then be deployed
for loss- and gain-of-function studies of the role of stress in morphogenetic competency, to test the predictions of our model in vivo. More
broadly, it may be that stress and geometric frustration [103] are a truly
interdisciplinary concepts, reaching far beyond the conventional notions
of psychological stress and highlighting a central symmetry across fields
ranging from the computational mathematics and physics of Ising
models and [[Hopfield Networks]] [104,105] to the remarkable capabilities
of [[Regeneration]] [5,54] and even the epigenetics of [[Extended Inheritance]] [106–108]. Stress is a good candidate for a
central invariant across active agents of highly diverse scale and
composition. Feedback between computational models and wetlab
biology, focused around the primary concept of the causal geometry of
stress, offer the exciting potential to unify and advance aspects of the
field of [[Diverse Intelligence]] in ways that benefit fundamental questions
of cognitive science, robotics engineering, and biomedical disorders of
homeostatic cellular collectives.
Fig. 7. Stress is not predictive of the target pattern being developed. (A): Stress map of an embryo with competent stress sharing ability over several stages of
development. Development towards two independent target patterns, a thumb-up and a smiling face, is shown in sequence A.I and sequence A.II respectively. Stress
maps shown here are at developmental stages of 0 %, 25 %, 50 %, 75 %, and 98 % to completion. The stress map at any stage is an indication of the directional
derivative of stressed-cells with respect to developmental time. Arrows indicate the gradient vector of a corresponding stressed-cell at any stage during development.
As development proceeds, stressed cells grow fewer in number, and is reflected by the reduced number of gradient vectors. Note that at 100 % completion, the stress
map is an empty field.
(B.I): Similarity between the stress map of an embryo w/sharing and the thumbs-up target pattern over the course of development. Similarity increases from 0.53 to
0.61 over 100 developmental stages. In contrast, a randomized stress pattern (which was set up as a control) shows no such trend (black trace), helping differentiate
competent sharing based cellular reorganization and random cell movements.
(B.II): Similarity between the stress map of an embryo w/sharing and the smiling-face target pattern during development. Similarity decreases from 0.47 to 0.25 over
80 stages of development. A randomized stress pattern was set up as control at each developmental-stage and helped in discerning the effect of competency from the
effects of random cell movements (black trace).
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
CRediT authorship contribution statement
[[Lakshwin Shreesha]]: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. [[Michael Levin]]: Writing – review & editing, Writing –
original
draft,
Supervision,
Project
administration,
Methodology,
Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
Michael Levin reports financial support was provided by Templeton
World Charity Foundation Inc. for support of co-author Lakshwin
Shreesha. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no
known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
We thank Adam Goldstein and Axel de Baat for helpful comments on
the manuscript, and [[Richard Watson]] and Eors [[Eörs Szathmáry]] for helpful
discussions. M.L. gratefully acknowledges funding support from [[Astonishing Labs]] and from the [[Templeton World Charity Foundation]] via grant
TWCF0606, and from the [[Bill And Melinda Gates Foundation]].
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2024.150396.
References
[1] H. Rubin, Ordered heterogeneity and its decline in [[Cancer]] and aging, Adv. Cancer
Res. 98 (2007) 117–147, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-230X(06)98004-X.
[2] H. Rubin, What keeps cells in tissues behaving normally in the face of myriad
mutations? Bioessays 28 (2006) 515–524, https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.20403.
[3] H. Rubin, M. Chow, A. Yao, Cellular aging, destabilization, and cancer, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93 (1996) 1825–1830.
[4] H. Rubin, Cancer as a dynamic developmental disorder, Cancer Res. 45 (1985)
2935–2942.
[5] M. Levin, [[Collective Intelligence]] of [[Morphogenesis]] as a [[Teleonomy]], in: P.
A. Corning, S.A. Kauffman, D. Noble, J.A. Shapiro, R.I. Vane-Wright, A. Pross
(Eds.), Evolution “On Purpose” : [[Teleonomy]] in Living Systems, [[Mit Press]],
Cambridge, 2023, pp. 175–198.
[6] E. Bilotta, P. Pantano, Emergent patterning phenomena in 2D cellular automata,
Artif. Life 11 (2005) 339–362, https://doi.org/10.1162/1064546054407167.
[7] D. Peak, J.D. West, S.M. Messinger, K.A. Mott, Evidence for complex, collective
dynamics and emergent, distributed computation in plants, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 101 (2004) 918–922, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0307811100.
[8] G. Minati, E. Pessa, [[Emergence]] in Complex, Cognitive, Social, and Biological
Systems, Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New York, 2002.
[9] A. Bonforti, S. Duran-Nebreda, R. Montanez, R. Sole, Spatial [[Autopoiesis]] in
hybrid models of multicellular adhesion, Chaos 26 (2016) 103113, https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.4965992.
[10] C. Ozturkeri, C.G. Johnson, Evolution of [[Self]]-assembling patterns in cellular
automata using development, J. Cell. Automata 6 (2011) 257–300.
[11] [[Giovanni Pezzulo]], M. Levin, Top-down models in biology: explanation and control of
complex living systems above the molecular level, J. R. Soc. Interface 13 (2016),
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2016.0555.
[12] G. [[Giovanni Pezzulo]], M. Levin, Re-membering the body: applications of computational
neuroscience to the [[Downward Causation]] of regeneration of limbs and other complex
organs, Integr. Biol. 7 (2015) 1487–1517, https://doi.org/10.1039/c5ib00221d.
[13] A. Rosenblueth, [[Norbert Wiener]], J. Bigelow, Behavior, purpose, and [[Teleonomy]], Philos.
Sci. 10 (1943) 18–24.
[14] [[Christopher Fields]], M. Levin, [[Competency In Navigating Arbitrary Spaces]] as an invariant for
analyzing [[Cognition]] in diverse embodiments, Entropy 24 (2022), https://doi.org/
10.3390/e24060819.
[15] M. Levin, [[Developmental Bioelectricity]]: the cognitive glue enabling evolutionary scaling
from physiology to mind, Anim. Cognit. (2023), https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10071-023-01780-3.
[16] W.P. Clawson, M. Levin, Endless forms most beautiful 2.0: teleonomy and the
bioengineering of chimaeric and synthetic organisms, Biol. J. Linn. Soc. (2022),
https://doi.org/10.1093/biolinnean/blac073.
[17] A.K. Harris, The need for a concept of [[Shape Homeostasis]], Biosystems 173 (2018)
65–72, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystems.2018.09.012.
[18] V.P. Pai, A. Pietak, V. Willocq, B. Ye, N.Q. Shi, M. Levin, HCN2 Rescues brain
defects by enforcing endogenous [[Membrane Potential (Vmem)]] pre-patterns, Nat. Commun. 9 (2018)
998, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-03334-5.
[19] D.S. Adams, S.G. Uzel, J. Akagi, D. Wlodkowic, V. Andreeva, P.C. Yelick,
A. Devitt-Lee, J.F. Pare, M. Levin, Bioelectric signalling via potassium channels: a
mechanism for craniofacial dysmorphogenesis in KCNJ2-associated AndersenTawil Syndrome, J. Physiol. 594 (2016) 3245–3270, https://doi.org/10.1113/
JP271930.
[20] D. Savic, B.N. Belintzev, L.V. Beloussov, A.G. Zaraisky, Morphogenetic activity
prepattern in embryonic epithelia, Prog. Clin. Biol. Res. 217A (1986) 101–104.
[21] D. Savic, B.N. Belintzev, L.V. Beloussov, A.G. Zaraiskii, Morphogenetic activity
prepattern in embryonic epithelia [English], in: H.C. Slavkin (Ed.), Progress in
Developmental Biology, Part A, Alan R. Liss, 1986, pp. 101–104. New York, NY,
USA.
[22] P.T. Saunders, M.W. Ho, Primary and secondary waves in prepattern formation,
J. Theor. Biol. 114 (1985) 491–504, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5193(85)
80180-6.
[23] M.W. Ho, P.T. Saunders, E. Bolton, Bithorax phenocopy and pattern-formation .2.
A model of prepattern formation, Exp. Cell Biol. 51 (1983) 291–299.
[24] E. Lagasse, M. Levin, Future medicine: from molecular pathways to the collective
[[Intelligence]] of the body, Trends Mol. Med. (2023), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molmed.2023.06.007.
[25] J. Mathews, A.J. Chang, L. Devlin, M. Levin, Cellular signaling pathways as
plastic, proto-cognitive systems: implications for biomedicine, Patterns (N Y) 4
(2023) 100737, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2023.100737.
[26] A.-L. Cauchy, De la pression ou tension dans un corps solide, in: A.-L. Cauchy
(Ed.), Oeuvres Compl`etes: Series 2, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2009, pp. 60–78.
[27] M.D. Wasserman, B. Wing, N. Bickford, K. Hobbs, P. Dijkstra, J.A. Carr, Stress
responses across the scales of life: toward a universal theory of biological stress,
Integr. Comp. Biol. 61 (2021) 2109–2118, https://doi.org/10.1093/icb/icab113.
[28] M. Del Giudice, C.L. Buck, L.E. Chaby, B.M. Gormally, C.C. Taff, C.J. Thawley, M.
N. Vitousek, H. Wada, What is stress? A systems perspective, Integr. Comp. Biol.
58 (2018) 1019–1032, https://doi.org/10.1093/icb/icy114.
[29] N.N. Taleb, Antifragile : Things that Gain from Disorder, first ed., Random House,
New York, 2012.
[30] M. Darnell, S. Young, L. Gu, N. Shah, E. Lippens, J. Weaver, G. Duda, D. Mooney,
Substrate stress-relaxation regulates scaffold remodeling and bone formation in
vivo, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 6 (2017), https://doi.org/10.1002/
adhm.201601185.
[31] K. Lau, H. Tao, H. Liu, J. Wen, K. Sturgeon, N. Sorfazlian, S. Lazic, J.T. Burrows,
M.D. Wong, D. Li, S. Deimling, B. Ciruna, I. Scott, C. Simmons, R.M. Henkelman,
T. Williams, A.K. Hadjantonakis, R. Fernandez-Gonzalez, Y. Sun, S. Hopyan,
Anisotropic stress orients remodelling of mammalian limb bud ectoderm, Nat.
Cell Biol. 17 (2015) 569–579, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb3156.
[32] E.A. Zamir, L.A. Taber, Material properties and residual stress in the stage 12
chick heart during cardiac looping, J. Biomech. Eng. 126 (2004) 823–830.
[33] L.V. Beloussov, The interplay of active forces and passive mechanical stresses in
animal morphogenesis [English], in: N. Akkas (Ed.), Biomechanics of Active
Movement and Division of Cells, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994, pp. 131–180.
[34] M.V. Hunter, P.M. Willoughby, A.E.E. Bruce, R. Fernandez-Gonzalez, Oxidative
stress orchestrates cell polarity to promote embryonic wound healing, Dev. Cell
47 (2018) 377–387 e374, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2018.10.013.
[35] P.M. Gilbert, V.M. Weaver, Cellular adaptation to biomechanical stress across
length scales in tissue homeostasis and disease, Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 67 (2017)
141–152, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2016.09.004.
[36] S. Fulda, A.M. Gorman, O. Hori, A. Samali, Cellular stress responses: cell survival
and cell death, Int J Cell Biol 2010 (2010) 214074, https://doi.org/10.1155/
2010/214074.
[37] T.H. Friend, Behavioral aspects of stress, J. Dairy Sci. 74 (1991) 292–303, https://
doi.org/10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(91)78173-3.
[38] M. Levin, Technological approach to mind everywhere: an experimentallygrounded framework for understanding diverse bodies and minds, Front. Syst.
Neurosci. 16 (2022) 768201, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2022.768201.
[39] M. Levin, A.M. Pietak, J. Bischof, Planarian regeneration as a model of anatomical
homeostasis: recent progress in biophysical and computational approaches,
Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 87 (2018) 125–144, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
semcdb.2018.04.003.
[40] K.D. Birnbaum, A.S. Alvarado, Slicing across kingdoms: regeneration in plants
and animals, Cell 132 (2008) 697–710.
[41] J. Holtfreter, Transformation of a tail into a limb or gill-like structures, J. Exp.
Zool. 129 (1955) 623–648.
[42] N. Farinella-Ferruzza, The transformation of a tail into a limb after xenoplastic
transformation, Experientia 15 (1956) 304–305.
[43] K. Pinet, K.A. McLaughlin, Mechanisms of physiological tissue remodeling in
animals: manipulating tissue, organ, and organism morphology, Dev. Biol. 451
(2019) 134–145, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2019.04.001.
[44] K. Pinet, M. Deolankar, B. Leung, K.A. McLaughlin, Adaptive correction of
craniofacial defects in pre-metamorphic Xenopus laevis tadpoles involves thyroid
hormone-independent tissue remodeling, Development 146 (2019), https://doi.
org/10.1242/dev.175893.
[45] L.N. Vandenberg, D.S. Adams, M. Levin, Normalized shape and location of
perturbed craniofacial structures in the Xenopus tadpole reveal an innate ability
to achieve correct morphology, Dev. Dynam. 241 (2012) 863–878, https://doi.
org/10.1002/dvdy.23770.
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
[46] W.B. Cannon, Organization for physiological [[Homeostasis]], Physiol. Rev. 9 (1929)
399–431, https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.1929.9.3.399.
[47] [[John Hopfield]], Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective
computational abilities, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 79 (1982) 2554–2558.
[48] D. Sherrington, S. Kirkpatrick, Solvable model of a spin-glass, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35
(1975) 1792–1796, https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.35.1792.
[49] D.R. Hofstadter, M. Mitchell, The [[Copycat Project]]: a model of mental fluidity and
analogy-making. Analogical Connections, Ablex Publishing, Westport, CT, US,
1994, pp. 31–112.
[50] L. Shreesha, M. Levin, [[Cellular Competency]] during development alters
evolutionary dynamics in an [[Artificial Embryogeny]] model, Entropy-Switz 25
(2023) 131.
[51] D. Lobo, M. Solano, G.A. Bubenik, M. Levin, A linear-encoding model explains the
variability of the [[Homeostatic Setpoint]] in regeneration, J. R. Soc., Interface/the
Royal Society 11 (2014) 20130918, https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0918.
[52] L.N. Vandenberg, R.D. Morrie, D.S. Adams, [[V-Atpase]]-dependent ectodermal
[[Membrane Potential (Vmem)]] and pH regionalization are required for [[Craniofacial Development]], Dev.
Dynam. 240 (2011) 1889–1904, https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.22685.
[53] L.O. Chua, L. Yang, Cellular neural networks: theory, IEEE Trans. Circ. Syst. 35
(1988) 1257–1272, https://doi.org/10.1109/31.7600.
[54] M. Levin, Darwin’s agential materials: evolutionary implications of multiscale
[[Competency]] in developmental biology, Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 80 (2023) 142, https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00018-023-04790-z.
[55] M. Levin, The [[Individuation]] of a “[[Self]]”: [[Developmental Bioelectricity]]
drives multicellularity and [[Scale-Free Cognition]], Front. Psychol. 10 (2019) 2688,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02688.
[56] R.D. Beer, [[Autopoiesis]] and [[Cognition]] in the game of life, Artif. Life 10 (2004)
309–326, https://doi.org/10.1162/1064546041255539.
[57] R.D. Beer, The cognitive domain of a glider in the game of life, Artif. Life 20
(2014) 183–206, https://doi.org/10.1162/ARTL_a_00125.
[58] N. Ay, W. Lohr, The [[Umwelt]] of an embodied [[Self]]–a measure-theoretic
definition, Theory in biosciences = Theorie in den Biowissenschaften 134 (2015)
105–116, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12064-015-0217-3.
[59] [[Jakob von Uexküll]], A Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans with A Theory of
Meaning, Posthumanities, 12, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 2010,
p. 274, 1 online resource (272.
[60] H.Y. Lu, E.S. Lorenc, H. Zhu, J. Kilmarx, J. Sulzer, C. Xie, P.N. Tobler, A.
J. Watrous, A.L. Orsborn, J. Lewis-Peacock, S.R. Santacruz, Multi-scale neural
decoding and analysis, J. Neural. Eng. 18 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1088/17412552/ac160f.
[61] A.G. Huth, T. Lee, S. Nishimoto, N.Y. Bilenko, A.T. Vu, J.L. Gallant, Decoding the
semantic content of natural movies from human brain activity, Front. Syst.
Neurosci. 10 (2016) 81, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2016.00081.
[62] S. Nishimoto, A.T. Vu, T. Naselaris, Y. Benjamini, B. Yu, J.L. Gallant,
Reconstructing visual experiences from brain activity evoked by natural movies,
Curr. Biol. : Cailiao Baohu 21 (2011) 1641–1646, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cub.2011.08.031.
[63] T. Naselaris, R.J. Prenger, K.N. Kay, M. Oliver, J.L. Gallant, Bayesian
reconstruction of natural images from human brain activity, Neuron 63 (2009)
902–915, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2009.09.006.
[64] [[Sawyer Manicka]], M. Levin, The [[Cognitive Lens]]: a primer on conceptual tools for
analysing [[Cognition]] in developmental and regenerative
[[Morphogenesis]], Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 374 (2019) 20180369,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2018.0369.
[65] [[Karl Friston]], M. Levin, B. Sengupta, [[Giovanni Pezzulo]], Knowing one’s place: a free-energy
approach to [[Pattern Regulation]], J. R. Soc. Interface 12 (2015), https://doi.org/
10.1098/rsif.2014.1383.
[66] P.L. Freddolino, S. Tavazoie, Beyond homeostasis: a predictive-dynamic
framework for understanding cellular behavior, Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 28
(2012) 363–384, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-cellbio-092910-154129.
[67] P.L. Freddolino, J. Yang, A. Momen-Roknabadi, S. Tavazoie, Stochastic tuning of
gene expression enables cellular adaptation in the absence of pre-existing
regulatory circuitry, Elife 7 (2018), https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.31867.
[68] H.I. Schreier, Y. Soen, N. Brenner, Exploratory adaptation in large random
networks, Nat. Commun. 8 (2017) 14826, https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms14826.
[69] S. Stern, T. Dror, E. Stolovicki, N. Brenner, E. Braun, Genome-wide transcriptional
[[Plasticity]] underlies cellular adaptation to novel challenge, Mol. Syst. Biol. 3
(2007) 106, https://doi.org/10.1038/msb4100147.
[70] S. Marom, G. Shahaf, Development, learning and memory in large random
networks of cortical neurons: lessons beyond anatomy, Q. Rev. Biophys. 35
(2002) 63–87.
[71] Y. Soen, M. Knafo, M. Elgart, A principle of organization which facilitates broad
Lamarckian-like adaptations by improvisation, Biol. Direct 10 (2015) 68, https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13062-015-0097-y.
[72] M. Elgart, O. Snir, Y. Soen, [[Dukkha]]-mediated tuning of [[Developmental Memory]]
and plasticity in flies, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1849 (2015) 462–466, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.08.004.
[73] F. Heylighen, [[Stigmergy]] as a universal coordination mechanism II: varieties and
evolution, Cognit. Syst. Res. 38 (2016) 50–59, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cogsys.2015.12.007.
[74] F. Heylighen, Stigmergy as a universal coordination mechanism I: definition and
components, Cognit. Syst. Res. 38 (2016) 4–13, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cogsys.2015.12.002.
[75] D. Jay, Y. Luo, W. Li, Extracellular heat shock protein-90 (eHsp90): everything
you need to know, Biomolecules 12 (2022), https://doi.org/10.3390/
biom12070911.
[76] P. Smiley, M. Levin, Competition for finite resources as coordination mechanism
for morphogenesis: an evolutionary algorithm study of [[Artificial Embryogeny]],
Biosystems 221 (2022) 104762, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biosystems.2022.104762.
[77] R. Gawne, K.Z. McKenna, M. Levin, Competitive and coordinative interactions
between body parts produce adaptive developmental outcomes, Bioessays 42
(2020) e1900245, https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.201900245.
[78] M. Levin, Bioelectrical approaches to [[Cancer]] as a problem of the scaling of the
cellular self, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 165 (2021) 102–113, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2021.04.007.
[79] D. Moore, S.I. Walker, M. Levin, Cancer as a disorder of patterning information:
computational and biophysical perspectives on the cancer problem, Convergent
Science Physical Oncology 3 (2017) 043001.
[80] F. Heylighen, Cybernetic principles of aging and rejuvenation: the bufferingchallenging strategy for life extension, Curr. Aging Sci. 7 (2014) 60–75.
[81] [[Poul Lyon]], F. Kuchling, Valuing what happens: a biogenic approach to valence and
(potentially) affect, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 376 (2021) 20190752,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0752.
[82] [[Mark Solms]], The [[Hard Problem Of Consciousness]] and the [[Free Energy Principle]], Front.
Psychol. 9 (2018) 2714, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02714.
[83] S. Paulson, S. Hustvedt, M. Solms, S. Shamdasani, The deeper self: an expanded
view of [[Consciousness]], Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1406 (2017) 46–63, https://doi.org/
10.1111/nyas.13403.
[84] [[Thomas Nagel]], The View from Nowhere, Oxford University Press, New York, 1986.
[85] T. Nagel, What is it like to be a bat? Phil. Rev. 83 (1974) 435–450.
[86] R. Benndorf, H. Bielka, Cellular [[Stress Response]]: stress proteins–physiology and
implications for cancer, Recent Results, Cancer Res. 143 (1997) 129–144.
[87] H. Oberleithner, H.J. Westphale, B. Gassner, Alkaline stress transforms MadinDarby canine kidney cells, Pflügers Archiv 419 (1991) 418–420.
[88] A. Peters, B.S. McEwen, K. Friston, Uncertainty and stress: why it causes diseases
and how it is mastered by the brain, Prog. Neurobiol. 156 (2017) 164–188,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2017.05.004.
[89] K.J. Friston, W. Wiese, J.A. Hobson, [[Consciousness]] and the origins of consciousness:
from cartesian duality to markovian monism, Entropy 22 (2020), https://doi.org/
10.3390/e22050516.
[90] M. Solms, Is there something it is like to be a strange particle? Comment on ’Path
integrals, particular kinds, and strange things, in: K. Friston, et al. (Eds.), Phys.
Life Rev. 48 (2023) 1–2, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2023.11.008.
[91] M. Solms, The statistical mechanics of felt uncertainty under [[Active Inference]],
Behav. Brain Sci. 46 (2023) e108, https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0140525X22002783.
[92] D.D. Georgiev, Inner privacy of conscious experiences and quantum information,
Biosystems 187 (2020) 104051, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biosystems.2019.104051.
[93] D. Conrad, Consciousness, privacy, and information, Biosystems 38 (1996)
207–210, https://doi.org/10.1016/0303-2647(95)01592-2.
[94] A. Matos, R. Suzuki, T. Arita, Heterochrony and artificial embryogeny: a method
for analyzing artificial embryogenies based on developmental dynamics, artif,
Life 15 (2009) 131–160.
[95] K.O. Stanley, R. Miikkulainen, A taxonomy for artificial embryogeny, Artif. Life 9
(2003) 93–130.
[96] [[Norbert Wiener]], [[Cybernetics]]; or, [[Cybernetics]] in the Animal and the
Machine, 2d ed., M.I.T. Press, New York, 1961.
[97] H.D. Potter, K.J. Mitchell, Naturalising agent causation, Entropy 24 (2022),
https://doi.org/10.3390/e24040472.
[98] F. Heylighen, The meaning and origin of [[Teleonomy]]: a dynamical systems
perspective, Biol. J. Linn. Soc. (2022) in press.
[99] E. Busseniers, T. Veloz, F. Heylighen, Goal directedness, chemical organizations,
and cybernetic mechanisms, Entropy 23 (2021), https://doi.org/10.3390/
e23081039.
[100] G.P. Wagner, E.M. Erkenbrack, A.C. Love, Stress-induced evolutionary
innovation: a mechanism for the origin of cell types, Bioessays 41 (2019)
e1800188, https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.201800188.
[101] E.M. Erkenbrack, J.D. Maziarz, O.W. Griffith, C. Liang, A.R. Chavan, M.
C. Nnamani, G.P. Wagner, The mammalian decidual cell evolved from a cellular
stress response, PLoS Biol. 16 (2018) e2005594, https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pbio.2005594.
[102] L. Cisneros, K.J. Bussey, A.J. Orr, M. Miocevic, C.H. Lineweaver, P. Davies,
Ancient genes establish stress-induced mutation as a hallmark of cancer, PLoS
One 12 (2017) e0176258, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0176258. ARTN
e0176258.
[103] H. Matsuda, Physical nature of higher-order mutual information: intrinsic
correlations and frustration, Phys. Rev. 62 (2000) 3096–3102, https://doi.org/
10.1103/PhysRevE.62.3096.
[104] J. Totafurno, C.J. Lumsden, L.E. Trainor, Structure and function in biological
hierarchies: an Ising model approach, J. Theor. Biol. 85 (1980) 171–198.
[105] M. Weber, J. Buceta, The [[Cellular Ising Model]]: a framework for phase transitions
in multicellular environments, J. R. Soc. Interface 13 (2016), https://doi.org/
10.1098/rsif.2015.1092.
L. Shreesha and M. Levin

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 731 (2024) 150396
[106] A. Jawaid, M. Roszkowski, I.M. Mansuy, [[Epigenetic Inheritance]] of
traumatic [[Dukkha]], Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 158 (2018) 273–298, https://doi.org/
10.1016/bs.pmbts.2018.03.003.
[107] D. Crews, R. Gillette, S.V. Scarpino, M. Manikkam, M.I. Savenkova, M.K. Skinner,
Epigenetic [[Extended Inheritance]] of altered stress responses, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109 (2012) 9143–9148, https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1118514109.
[108] Y. Xue, M. Acar, Mechanisms for the [[Epigenetic Inheritance]] of [[Stress Response]] in
single cells, Curr. Genet. 64 (2018) 1221–1228, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00294018-0849-1.
L. Shreesha and M. Levin
